AGGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE INVESTOR
by Martin J Whitmanm Martin Shubik
May 2011

p 61 In spite of the frequent assumptions of many economists agbout the perfection 
and efficiency of markets, it has been our observation that where control of 
business is not involved, there are fewer individuals capable of analyzing equity 
securities in depth than there are opportunities to analyze.

p 127 A lack of debt or an ability to create new debt is frequently a most 
important asset.

p 128 Financial strength does not arise solely out of a lack of existing debt or 
an ability to create new debt, but may also exist because of the presence of 
low-cost long-term debt.

p 162 Profit Margins

Low profit margins can be a strong reason for purchasing a security if there are 
grounds for believing that they will improve. Small improvements in low profit 
margins can result in dramatic increases in earnings, whereas the same 
improvements for high-profit-margin business would have only a modest impact on 
earnings.

A good argument can, of course, be made for investment in the stocks of companies 
that have had consitently high profit margins on the basis that such good results 
over the long term are likely to persist indefinitely, and that companies in such 
a position will continue to profit from the competitive muscle.

But slavish adherence to the high profit margin as the central guide to equity 
investment can be dangerous for two reasons. First, because constantly high profit 
margin firms are viewed by the investment public in general as good, stock market 
prices for such companies tend to be high. Second, it happens not infrequently 
that high profit margins that have persisted for many years suddenly become 
nonexistent. Companies to which this happened in recent times include NCP, Pitney 
Bowes, General Foods, Litton Industries, union Carbide and Aluminium Company of 
America,

It is certainly true that each of today's high=profit-margin giants faces special 
problems. For General Motors, smaller cars with lower profit margins may be an 
increased part of the product mix in an overall market where General Motors' 
market penetration has been decreasing, at least as measured from the dates that 
foreign imports seized a 15 to 20 percent penetration of the U.S. market; Avon has 
spawned a host of imitators; American Telephone faces the specter of new 
competition on various fronts from both large and small companies; and both Kodak 
and IBM face antitrust problems as well as increasing competition.

p 163 In fact, we concur that it is a good policy to opt for large firms that are 
generally recognised as first-class when the investor is unable for any reason to 
obtain a fair degree of know-how about the company whose securities he desires to 
own.

p 165 The former practice of deferring profit for accounting purposes is called 
normalization, whereas the immediate booking of all profit is called flow through.

p 167 It should be noted tgat kuverak accounting policies in one context become 
conservative in the next. pooling-of-interest accounting is liberal accounting 
when a company is acquired at a premium over book value; purchase accounting 
becomes liberal when the acquisition is obtained at a discount from book value, 
because the acquirer, for stockholder financial-statement purposes, will increase 
the income by crediting the profit-and-loss astatement to reflect the amortization 
of "negative good will".

p 174 Comparative analysis is an essential tool in much of security analysis, We 
are always comparing one company with another and one investment opportunity with 
another.

p 175 Where the four standards of the financial-integrity approach - strong 
financial position, reasonably honest control groups, reasonable amounts of 
information available and low price relative to estimates of net asset value - are 
the sine qua non of investment, comparative analysis tends to become secondary.

p 178 There is no a priori way for concluding that corporate diversification is 
per se good or bad. Diversification usually requires a high order of managerial 
ability, in operations as well as investing.

p 191 In describing stock market behaviour, Graham and Dodd point out that book 
values "lose virtually all significance". Specifically, book values appear th them 
to have no relevance in determining earning pwoer for rail and industrial 
companies or railroad. Their studies show that market prices for rail and 
industrial  common stocks had no correlation with book values: some were sold at 
high multiples of book value, others at discount. Rather, Graham and Dodd found 
that market prices for these common stocks depended on the earning power and 
dividend payments of the company.

As a special case Grahama and Dodd recommend that in evaluting risk or spotting 
unique opportunities, common-stock investors should use book vlaue as a benchmark. 
They warn against common stocks selling at many times book value as carrying 
inordinate risk. On the other other hand, they point out that a common stock 
selling at only a "small fraction" of it book value may have "speciulative 
possibilities - especially so if there is no substantial debt". Common stocks 
selling at a price well below book value, earning-power value and past average 
market prices can be very promising, according to these authors.

p 192 We have a different emphasis than Graham and Dodd and the financial 
accountants. To us, book value, in virutally all anaysis other than predictions of 
common-stock prices for the immediate future, is at least as significant as 
accounting earnings. And in practice, one is not the substitute for the other. But 
in choosing a strating point within financial statements for an analysis, book 
value seems to us to be the better starting point most of the time than accounting 
earnings.

p 221 It is important for investors relying on a financial-integrity approach to investing to understand the roles cash dividends play in securities analysis, portfolio management and corporate finance. We believe the real roles of cash dividends tend to be different from those postulated in traditional theories. For us, there are five principal roles of cash dividends. First, dividend levels and changes in dividends, up or down, seem likely to have impacts on stock market prices. Second, cash dividends are important placebos for noncontrol investors insofar as such investors lack confidence in the merits of the equity securities they hold. Third, dividends are curcial in portfolio management where prudent managers seek a positive cash-carry - that is, where they strive to have income from the holding of securities exceed interest expense (and possibly dividend costs too_ incurred in connection with the portfolio being managed. Forurth, the receipt of dividend income may be a legal necessity for certain security holders, such as various fiduciaries. Finally, it is our view that for any investment to be attractive, the investor has to perceive a bailout sooner or later, as we point out in chapter 3, "The significance of market performance" - and dividends are one form of bailout.

p 226 If we were to generalize about the subject, we would approach the stock market impact of dividend payments differently from the way Graham and Dodd do. Other things being equal, the common stock whose issuer is a low dividend payer would be the better buy for investors seeking market appreciation, rather than a cash-carry. As Graham and Dodd agree, of two companies with the same earning power and with the same general position in the industry, the lower dividend company should sell at the lower price; this by itself, should make the lower dividend payer the more attractive buy for many investors. Furthermore, the company whose common stock is available at the lower price will have more room to increase its dividend and eventually command a higer price. it appears likely that market price action may be more affected by the trend in dividend payments than byt the amount of the dividends. The company paying the lower dividend will retain more earnings and in the future be in a better position to improve its industry status, its financial position and therefore its earnings. It is entirely possible that, assuming the companies are in the same position now, had the company paying the lower dividend paid a higher dividend, it could never have achieved the position it now has.

p 234 It is our experience tha the acquisition of a portfolio of minority interests is attractive because of the likelihood that parents will eventually attempt to azquire, through mop-up mergers, 100 percent interest in subsidiaries at prices reflecting substantial premiums above stock market prices (which are depressed in part because such securities are liable to lack marketability). Such securities, which have been aquired in recent years by their parents at substantital premiums above the market, include Indian head, Marcor, and Otis Elevator Company.

In acquiring these types of minority-interest securities, however, it frequently is important to the investor that such securities pay dividends, in part because an investor may need income and in apart because the receipt of dividends amy be far more certain than cash tender offers or mop-mergers that may never occur.

p 264 One important rule of thumb we tend to follow in postarbitrage investing is to azquire positions in securities at prices two thirds or less than control shareholders pain in the recent past to obtain control. The postarbitrage world is such that equity securities often sell for 50 percent or less of the price paid for ocntrol.

p 273 What looks like a stone wall to a layman is frequently a triumpahl arch to a lawyer (Mr. Dooley). It is likely that more fortunes with the finanacial ocmmunity are obtained through the discount pruchase of securities in negotitated transaxtions than through brilliant analysis resulting in the purchase at market prices of securities that will appreciate dramatically. A discount purchase is one in which a stockholder obtains securities at the price below that which prevalis or is created in a public market.

p 339 It is an unture and misleading myth that companies seeking acquisitions - for example, Leasco - look for companies with bad managements. The opposite is true. Leasco would not have been interested in Reliance if they did not believe it was a well-run going concern. To have been interested otherwise when Leasco had no operating experience in the insurance industry would have been stupid.


