THE LITTLE BOOK OF BEHAVIORAL INVESTING
JAMES MONTIER

p 14 First stop - emotions and the heat of the moment.

p 15 prepare, plan and pre-commit to a strategy

p 19 we should do out investment research when we are in a cold, rational state - and when nothing much is happening in the markets - and the pre-commit to following our own analysis and prepared action steps.

Page 36:

He [Ben Graham] noted: Observation over many years has taught us that
the chief losses to investors come from the purchase of low-quality
securities at times of favourable business conditions. The purchasers
view the current good earnings as equivalent to "earning power" and
assume that prosperity is synonymous with safety.

p 38 stock-broker research generally conforms to three self-serving principles:
* rule 1: all news is good news (if the news is bad, it can always get better)
* rule 2: everything is always cheap (even if you have to make up new valuation methodologies)
* rule 3: assertion trumps evidence (never let the facts get in the way of a good story).


Page 39:

We should get used to asking "Must I believe this?" rather than the
far more common "Can I believe this?"

Indeed, most of the best investors appear to ask themselves a very
different default question from the rest of us. Many of these
investors generally run concentrated portfolios, with the default
question being "Why should I own this investment?" Whereas for fund
managers who are obsessed with tracking error and career risk, the
default question changes to "Why shouldn't I own this stock?" This
subtle distinction in default questions can have a dramatic impact
upon performance.

p 46 "Don't question authority. They don't know the answer either!"

Page 49: In one staudy, professional investors were pitted against
students in a psychology course. All the participants were asked to
select one stock from a pair as being likely to outperform the other
every month. All the companies were well-known blue-chip names, and
players were given the name, industry, and prior 12 months'
performance for each stock. Overall, the students were around 59%
confident in their stock-picking skills. The professionals were on
average 65% confident of their abilities. ... The students picked the
right stock 49% of the time, while the professionals picked the right
stock less than 40% of the time. When the professionals said they were
100% confident in their picks, that is to say there was no doubt in
their mind that they had picked the right stock, they were actually
right less than 12% of the time. What was behind this appalling
performance? Well, the players were asked to rank the factors they
relied upon to reach their decisions. The students said that guessing
was their primary input (as was to be expected). The single biggest
factor in the professionals' decisions was "other knowledge" - things
that the experts thought they knew about the stocks in question from
outside the scope of the study. this is a clear expample of the
illusion of knowledge driving overconfidence.



PAGE 52: Those men who needed their wives' permission to trade
outperformed the single guys. Unfortunately, those women who needed
their husband's permission to trade underperformed the single
women. So not only are men bad traders, they are a bad influence as
well.

p 87 chapter heading: volatility equals opportunity 

p 96 we are twice as likely to look for information that agrees with
us than we are to seek out disconfirming evidence [we should therfore
look for disconfirming evidence]

page 102 Berkowitz goes further and even provides a list of in which:
"Companies die and how they're killed ... Here are the ways you
implode: you don't generate cash, you burn cash, you're
over-leveraged, you play Russian Roulette, you have idiots for
management, you have a bad board, you 'diworsify', you buy your stock
too high, you lie with GAAP accounting"

p 104 I [Doug Kass] have often written that both perma-bears and
perma-bulls are attention-getters, not money-makers. The perma-bear
cult, of which i have often been accused of being a memeber, never
ever or rarely make money. ... Rather than managing money, the
perma-bear crows is typically inhabited by writers of market letters,
investment strategists and economists turned strategists, all of whome
have little or no skin in the game. They also make a lot of speeches
during downturns for a helluva lot of money and often write editorials
in the financial times, New York Times, and Wall Street Journal.

page 109 exhibit 9.1 "shows that analysts are exceptionally good at
one thing, and possibly one thing alone - telling you what just
happened". It clearly shows that analysts lag reality.

page 112 I should also point out that it appears that people are
particularly bad at spotting regime changes. Researchers have shown
that in a serie sof experiments using urns like in the question above,
people tend to underreact in unstable environments with precise
signals (turning points), but overreach to stable environments with
noisy signals (trending markets). This helps explain why economists
and analysts tend to miss turning points in the market. They get hung
up on the stable environment and ovveract to it; hence they miss the
important things that happen when the environment becomes more
unstable (a recession starts) and underreact to such developments.

page 117 Of all the dangers that investors face, perhaps none is more
seductive than the siren song of stories. Stories essentially govern
the way we think. We will abandon evidence in favour of a good story.

page 122 Psycholigically, we know you will feel attracted to the
admired stocks. Yet, the despised stocks are generally a far better
investment.

p 125 The market never failed to overpay for the long-term realized
successes of the growth companies, even though the market chose which
companies deserved the premium with remarkable accuracy ... Nealry
half of the price-implied relative growth expectations of the growth
and value stocks failed to materialize, so investors were paying twice
the fair premium for growth stock relative to value.

p 130 At GMO we define a bubble as a (real) price movement that is at
least two standard deviations from trend. Now, if the market returns
were normally destributed as predicted by the efficient markets
hypothesis, a two standard deviation event should occur roughly every
44 years. However, we found a stagering 30 plus bubbles wince 1925 -
that is the equivalent of slightly more than one every three
years. Not only did we find such a large number of bubbles, but every
single one of them burst, taking us back down two standard
deviations. That should happen once every 2,000, not 30 times in 84
years! This is the elephant in the room for those who believe in
efficient markets.

page 136 A Beginners Guide to Spotting Bubbles. So what can we do to
improve this sorry state of affairs? Essentially, we must rememver
Herb Stein's prosaic and prophetic words of wisdom: "If someth can't
go on forever, it won't". This is a deceptively simple and yet
immensely insightful phrase. If markets seem too good to be true, they
probably are. Learning to remember this simple fact would help prevent
a great deal of the angst caused when the bubble bursts.

p 146 my favourite quotation on the lack of historical appreciation in
finances comes from Jeremy Grantham, the chief strategist at GmO who,
when asked, "Do you think we will learn anything from this turmoil?"
responded, "We will learn an enormous amount in the very short
term,quite a bit in the medium term, and absolutely nothing in the
long term. That would be the historical precedent."

p 148 Sadly, few of us are as introspective as Einhorn. So to combat
the prevasive problem of self-attribution we really need to keep a
written record of the decisions we take and the reasons behind those
decisions - an investment diary, if you will. Keeping an investment
diary may sound daft, but George Soros did exactly that. In his
Alchemy of Finance he writes "I kept a diary in which I recorded the
thougts that went into my investment decisions on a real-time basis
... The experiment was a roaring success in financial terms - my fund
never did better. It also priduced a surprising result: I cam out of
the experiment with wquite different expectations about the future"

Having kept such a diary, we then need to map the outcomes of the
decisions and the reasonas behind those decisions into a quadrant
diagram, like the one shown below. That is, was I right for the right
reason?

page 154 This focus on the short term is hard to reconsile with any
fundamental view of investing. We can examine the drivers of equity
returns to see what we need to understand in order to invest. At a
one-year time horizon, the vast majority of your total return comes
from changes in valuation - which are effectively random fluctuations
in price. However, at a five-year time horizon, 80 percent of your
total return is generated by the price you pay for the investment plus
the growth in the underlying cash flow. These are the aspects of
investment that fundamental investors should understand, as they
clearly only matter in the long term.

page 193 Imagine you had bought a bottle of wine fo $15 a few years
ago. The wine has now appreciated in price so that at auction a bottle
would now fetch something north of $150. Would you be prepared to buy
a bottle sell your existing stock? The most frequently encountered
answer is a resounding "no" to both questions. When faces with this
situation, people are generally unwilling to either buy or sell the
wine.

p 196 As fund manager Richard Pzena put it, "I believe the biggest wat
you ad value as a value investor is how you behave on those down-25
percent situations. Sometimes you should buy more, sometimes you
should get out, and sometimes you should stay put, ... We probably
hold tight 40 percent of the time, and split 50/50 between buying more
and getting out".

p 197 Christopher Browne of Twedy Browne makes a further useful
distinction when it comes to selling an investment. He points out that
we should: "Make a clear distinction when selling between compounders
and cigar butt stocks. Once the cigar butts come back, you know to get
out because they're just going to go down again. With something like
Johnson & Johnson, though, you make a judgement call when it hits its
intrinsic value, based on your confidence in it ability to compound
returns and what you alternatives are.

p 207 In general, holding people accountable for outcomes tends to increase the following:
* focus on outcomes with a higher certainty, which is known as ambiguity aversion
* collection and use of all information (both useful and useless)
* preference for compromise options
* selection of products with average features on all measures over a product with mixed features (i.e. average on four traits, preferred to good on tow and bad on two)
* degree of loss aversion that people display
None of these features is likely to serve investors well. Together they suggest that when every decision is measured on outcomes, investors are likely to avoid uncertainty, chase noise, and herd with the consensus.

30-Dec-2011
Finis
