The Little Book of Value Investing
Christopher H Browne

p 21 Basically, Graham wanted to buy stocks selling at two-thirds or less of their intrinsic value. This was his margin of safety, the belt for his stocks. It is a margin of safety for a couple of reasons. First, if he was correct in his estimate of intrinsic value, the stock would rise 50 percent and still not be overvalued. Second, if the stock market hit a rough patch, he had the comfort of knowing that what he owned was ultimately worth more than he paid for it.

p 24 How much diversification should one have? The anser to that question depends on your tolerance of riskl. Certainly, 10 stocks in a portfolio is a minimum. Other investors like to own as many as 50 or even 100 if they can find that many meeting their criteria. You should ask yourself: If one of my stocks went bankrupt could I just slough it off?

p 26 A tried-and-true method of successful investing is to buy stocks selling at a low multiple of their earnings. Earnings are what a company has left after it has paid all its bills. Ben Graham once remarked that earnings are the principal factor driving stock prices.

p 29 Warren Buffett says that basing investment decisions on trailing earnings is investing by looking through the rearview mirror. When it comes to projecting earnings, however, the track record of Wall Street analysts is spotty at best and highly inaccurate at worst. When notes investor David Dreman looked at analyst estimates from 1973 to 1993, a period containing 78,695 separate quarterly estimates, he found that there was only a 1 in 170 chance that the analyst projections would fall within plus or minus 5 percent of the actual number.

p 31 I also look at low price-to-earnings opportunities in terms of what they might be worth to a potential acquirer, particularly a leveraged buyout, or LBO, firm. When companies make acquisitions of other companies, they not only look at free cash flow, they look at earnings before interest expense and income taxes. This is the best measure of how much money a company is earning. Interest expense is merely a function of how much debt a company has. An acquirer could choose to keep the debt or pay it off. The acquirer is most interested in knowing how much cash a business is producing. Professionals call this cash earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA). It is sort of a top line earnings number that shows how much cash would be available to an owner of the entire busines to use for paying interest or reinvesting in the business. When companies are bought by leveraged buyout firms, the LBO firm typically uses a lot of debt to finance the purchase. EBITDA is a way of measuring the cash that would be available to service the debt.

p 36 When searching for stocks that are a bargain compared with their asset value, we start with those companies selling below book value per share. This was one of Graham's chief investment criteria and has helped me uncover some tremendous bargains over the years.

p 36 Buying stocks below book value can lead to some of the best investments you can make.

p 37 I have done extensive research into the profit potential of stocks selling below book value. In the early 1980s, I examined stocks in the period from 1970 to 1981. I analysed all 7,000 companies that were in the Compustate database during that period. I looked for comanies that had at least $1m in market capitalisation and sold at no more that 140 percent of their book value. I sorted them into groups based on price-to-book value and computed their sex-month, and one-, two, and three- year performance. I found that all these grouping beat the overall market ove the one-, two-, or three-year periods althoung in many instances they lagged for the first six months. Buying the lowest grouping, stocks selling for less than 30 percent of book value, would have turned $1m into more than $23m over that time frame, compared with $1m growing to just $2.6m in the overall market.

p 38 Thier results were similar: Stocks selling at low multiples to book value compared with the glamorous names performed significantly better by anywhere from 6.3 percent annuwally to 14.3 percent per year over periods from 1967 to present, in the United States and outseide the United States.

p 51 A basic principle of accounting is that if you take a company's net worth or book value at the beginning of the year and add to that the earnings for the ensuing year, and subtract what it paid out to shareholders in dividends, you should end up with the year-end's net worth or book value. Not with Roche. In some years, book value increased more than the reported earnings after subtracting the dividend payment. As I dug deeper, I found that Roche had a habit of taking reserves for contingent liabilities, which had the result of reducing reported earnings. Why? Who knows? It just wanted to be conservative, especially in a particularly profitable year. 

p 59 There is only one logical reason for insiders to reach into their wallets and buy stock in the open market. They think the stock price is going higher.

p 60 Stocks bough by insiders outperform the market by at least a two-to-one margin, and this applies around the world (unfortunately, only a few countries outside the United States require company insiders to report their stock purchases and sales). Insider buying of stocks selling at low multiples of earnings or below asset value is even better. Consistent pruchases by insiders is an even better indication - with below-book-value stocks. And, you guessed it, stocks with high valuation and insider selling to to underperform by a wide margin.

There is another way that corporate insiders can send a signal that better times may be ahead. When the borad of directors of a company decides to buy stock in the open market, it may well be a sign that they believe the shares are undervalued and do not adequately reflect the future prospects for growth. They feel that the best return on corporate cash is by buying up their own shares in the marketplace. If they are correct and are buying the shares at a discount to what they are worth, then per share value for other shareholders increases. Any share buybacks done below book value will increase the per share book value of the remaining shares. With so many potential benefits from a share buyback, it makes sense to look closely at companies announcing stock buybacks that appear to be cheap relative to earnings or assets.

p 64 Risk is more often in the price you pay than the stock itself.

p 64 In each case, the rapid decline of prices brought bargain issues that an investor could buy for a lot less than their precollapse price.

p 64 It is important to understand that the prices of solid companies with strong balance sheets and earnings usually recover. In my experience, they always have and the always will.

p 76 Another method for uncovering opportunities that might belong in our inventory is to look at the prices paid in coprorate mergers and acquisitions to find stocks that are selling at a significant discount to what they are actually worth to a knowledgeable buyer. This discount will not escape the eyes of a competitor or larger corporation that might have an interest in entering a particular industry by taking over a company in that field. Most of the time, mergers or takeovers will occur at a price that is fairly close to the real worth of the business.

p 76 Savvy value investors can collect the prices paid in acquisitions, calculate the financials including price to sales, price to EBIT (earnings before interest and teaxes), the pretax, pre-interest earningsm and EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization), along with other ratios, and keep them in aproprietoary database for future reference like I do.

p 78 Many of the companies on our initial list are cheap for a reason; they have fundamental problems that make them decidely not valuable.

p 79 The first and most toxic reason that stocks bercome cheap is too much debt. In good times, companies with decent cash flow may borrow large amounts of money on the theory that if they continue to grow, they can meet the interest and principal payments in the future.

p 79 However, as techonology changes and prices dropped due to increase in competition, it became more and more difficult for them to meet those mounting interest bills. In one of Ben Graham's last interviews, he explained that he used a simple yardstick to measure health. A company should own twice as much as it owes. This philosophy has helped me avoid companies that owe too much to survive.

Stock prices may also drop, and thus make out list, because a company falls short of Wall Street analysts' earnings estimates. Analysts seem to be more focussed on short-term earnings gains than future long-term success.

p 80 Countless investment systems are built on the concept of buying shares when a company exceeds the analysts' estimates and selling shares when it doesn't. This thinking prevalis even though quareterly or yearly earnings have been priven to be notoriously unreliable.

p 80 Routinely, large and good companies get pushed to new stock price lows because they missed the esitimates of the thundering herd of Wall Street. Missing earnings is not fatal, and it tends to creat opportunity for the value buyer; if the trend continues, however, the shares will likely continue to fall.

p 81 Stocks may also fall because of labor contracts. During the good times, some companies and industries cave into labor union demands that were affordable at the time. Little did they realise that they were mortgaging the future. As new competitors unburdened by costly labor contracts enters their industries, their profits disappear.

p 82 If a company is facing strong competition from a more efficient competitor with lower costs, it is perhaps best to utter those comforting workds "no, thank you" and move on to the next candidate.

Obsolescence is another potentially fatal cause for falling prices. Although I am sure that the last large-scale manufacturer of buggy whips or hand-cranked automobile made a very fine product, there was simply no longer a need for its product.

p 88 One of the most important aspects of the balance sheet is liquidity. Liquidity is the amount of cash the company can lay its hands on in the short term. Liquidity provides the flexibility to withstand down cycles in the economy, pay dividends to shareholders, buy back stock, and take advantage of futurre opportunities. You also want to make sure that the company is not overly burdened with debt, and that there is enough capital to stay in business during bad times.

p 89 Dividing current liabilities into current assets gives us an important ration in balance sheet analysis, the current ratio. This ratio reveals a company's ability to pay its short-term obligations. A rough rule of thumb is a ratio of two to one, that is, the company has twice the amount of liquid assets as it has short-term debts and obligations. This can vary depending on the business, but I like to err on the conservative side. It is also helpful to compare this number to other companies in the same industry. By comparing companies in the same industry, the investor can then determine which companies are in better financial shapre. When compared against the industry average, a lower ration may idicate possible liquidity problems. It is also important to look at the ratio over the past several years. A current ratio that is steadily declining year over year may indicate that a serious liquidity problem is developing. It is also helpful to examine the relationship in cash terms. When you subtract the current liabilities from the current assts, you have calculated what is known as working capital. The rule of thumb here is simply the more the better. It is also a good idea to see if this number is rising or falling over the years. A variation of the current ratio, known as the quick ratio, removes inventories from the calculation. Although inventory can usually be converted to cash, it may be impossible for the company to receive full value for the inventory if it is subject to a fire sale. This is also sometimes called the acide test ratio and gives a clear view of a company's cash position versus its bills.

p 91 Another measure that gives us a good idea of a comapny's solvency and ability to survive is the debt-to-equity ratio. This is the toal debt, both long and short term, divided by the shareholder equity. If the number is higher than one, we know that the company is funded primarily by debt rather than equity investment. This is not necessarily the end of th world, but it means you need to investigate further. It pays to compare this number with that of other companies in the same industry. A stalbe business such as a public utlity can service more debt than a yound technology company that needs cash to reinvest in research and development of new poducts. In general, a high debt-to-equity ratio means that a company has been financing its growth by borrrowing. Leveraging the company by increasing debts levels is a double-edged sword. If a company can invest the money it borrows, and earn a higher return than it pays in interest, it should be able to quickly improve its profits. If it cannot earn a higher return than the interest it pays, there is a real danger of default and banktruptcy down the road. The less debt on the balance sheet, the greater the margin of safety.

p 92 Comparing the leverage ratios of a company with others in the same industry also indicates its competitive position and its ability to ride out adverse economic times.

p 95 Haqving analaysed the revenue line, now turn your attention to the expense side of the business. First comes the cost of goods sold. This is the direct cost of producing whatever product or service the company sells. it includes the raw material and manufacturing/labor cost of making the comapny's product. This number can fluctuate over time. If it is rising as a percentage of revenues, it may indicate that rising costs that cannot be passed on to the customer are squeezing the long-term potential for profits. Or the number may indicate that the company faces new competition that may also squeeze profits. Sometimes higer expenses may indicate softening demand that may or may not be due to cyclical effects. Comapnies often discount the price of their products to move inventory off the shelf.

p 96 The steadier the gross profit margin, the better the business. From the gross profit margin, the now subtract operating expenses (called "selling, general and administrative expenses") in the income statement.

p 97 A higher or lower level of operating expenses could indicate bloated salaries or a less than watchful eye on overall expenses. Once you have this figure, you have the operating profit, or earnings before interest and taxes. This is the number that I like to use in valuing a company, as it is the figure most likely to be used by anyone interested in acquiring the entire company.

p 98 The most revealing aspect of the income statement is thr trend over 5 or 10 years. Are revenues rising or falling? Are expenses staying in line with revenues? Is there a cyclical pattern to earnings such as would be the case with economically sensitive companies? Are profits growing? Are there a lot of one-time charges or gains that indicate the company may be manufacturing or massaging the bottom line. I also look closely at the shares outstanding. A rising number may indicate that excessive stock options are being granted to executives, and this will dilute my share of coprorate profits.

p 99 Once you have a fair picture of a company's earnings, you can focus on other importatnt ratios. One of the more importatnt ratios I like to look at is return on capital (ROC). This is calculated by dividing earnings in any given year by the beginning year's capital, stockholder equity plus debt. 

p 100 It is also importatnt to consider the net profit margin. This is simply the earnings divided by the total revenues. if a company can grow its profit margins over time, every new dollar of goods sold has a leveraged impact on sales. Again, at a minimum, I like to see a consistent profit margin over a span of time. Investors who paid close attention to net profit margins could have predicted that the price wars in telecommunications, computers, and autos over the past few years were going to negatively impact earnings and they could have exited the stocks before prices collapsed. 

p 149 Warren Buffett once said that returns using the value approach are "lumpy". There will be periods of underperformance to achieve higher long-term results. I know that; most of our investors know that. Nevertheless, it can be difficult for even committed value investors to remain steadfast in the face of so much hype and excitement.

p 150 Overcondifdence is another significant psychologicval flaw of most investors and money managers.

p 153 However, in the 31 years from 1975 through 2005, the S&P 500 has risen more than 20 percent in 12 of 31 years, nearly 39 percent of the time.If you just did as good or nearly as good as the market in those years, you should be happy.

p 153 Caution should not be seasonal. One should not rediscover caution when markets are falling and forget about it when they are rising. Maintaining a steady state of mind, whether we are in good times or bad, is the key to successful long-term investing.

p 155 He found that indexes that exclude the highest P/E stocks and include soem smaller and mid-cap stocks did far better than the broader index. In essence, value counts. An index that emphasises lower P/E value stocks does better. I could have told him that years ago.

 p 166 In his study "Decile Portfolios of the New York Stock Exchange, 1965-1985", Yale professor Roger Ibbotson ranked all the stocks in 10 equally weighted groups (deciles) according to their P.E ratios. He examined all listed stocks from 1966 to 1984 and found that the cheaper, less popular stocks gave far better returns. In fact, $1 invested in the cheapest stocks grew to over six times as much as the highest P/E ratio companies and twice as much as those in the middle of the pack. He also looked at how stocks selling at very low multiples of book value compared with growth stocks selling at much higher multiples of asset value. He sorted all the stocks on the New York Stock Exhchange (NYSE) into deciles (grouping of 10) for each year and compared the performance of each group. He looked at stocks from 1967 6o 1984 and found that stocks priced very low compared to book value outperformed the glamorous names by better than two to one and the market as a whole by better than 75 percent.

p 168 They looked at the 35 stocks on the New York Stock Exchange that performed the worst over the prior five years against the 35 listed stocks that had been the brightest stars. They compared the results of investing in each basket with an index made up of an equally weighted portfolio of all stocks on the NYSE. The found that, on average, over the next 17 months, the worst stock gained about 17 percent more than the index, and the brightest stars of the past faded quickly returning about 6 percent less than the index over the time period. They also studied holding the portfolios of stocks over three years and found that the propr "bad" stocks continued to far outperform the best past performers.

p 170 He looked at stocks from 1961 to 1985 and sorted them into quintiles. Once again, the lower P/E ratio stocks outperformed more exciting growth companies by an extraordinary marginl. Over that time period, $1 invested in the lowest price-to-earnings ratio group returned more than five times the highest ratio stocks and double that of those in group two. Performance was three times as high as the companies in the middle group of P/E levels.

p 172 In "What Ha Worked in Investing," a paper authored by Tweedy, Browne, we examined several key studies that show the tremendous outperformance of stocks with insider buying. We looked at five key studies that showed that stocks with insider buying outperformed the stock market by at least a two--to-one margin.

p 172 The found that stocks with insider buying outperformed the market by over 6 percent over the next 12 months.

p 174 She looked at all the stocks in the Value Line universe from 1974 to 1983 and found that companies that bought back stock earned 50 percent more annually than those that did not. A study by University of Illinois professors David Ikenberry and Josef lakonishok in 1994 looked at companies that bought back stock from 1980 to 1990 and found that over the next four years they outperformed the market by 12.1 percent. For those companies that had other value trais selling at low prices to earnings or book value the professots found that the outperformance was over 45 percent.

p 175 They defined falling knives as stocks that had fallen 60 percent in price over the prior 12 months. They found that although these stocks did indeed represent a risky proposition with a bankruptcy and failure rate four times that of the market as a whole, as a group they far outperformed the market over one-two- and three-year holding periods. Not surprisingly they found that the larger the market capitalization of the company, the higher the outperformance and the less chance of corporate failure.

Finis
17-Sep-2011
