Common Sense Investing: The Papers of Benjamin Graham
Written by Behnjamin Graham
Compiled by www.valuehuntr.com

p 17:

My first, more limited, technique confines itself to the purchase of
common stocks at less than their working-capital value, or
net-current-asset value, giving no weight to the plant and other fixed
assets, and deducting all liabilities in full from the current
assets. We used this approach extensively in managing investment
funds, and over a 30-odd year period we must have earned an average of
some 20 per cent per year from this source. For a while, however,
after the mid- 1950's, this brand of buying opportunity became very
scarce because of the pervasive bull market. But it has returned in
quantity since the 1973-74 decline. In January 1976 we counted over
300 such issues in the Standard & Poor's Stock Guide--about 10 per
cent of the total. I consider it a foolproof method of systematic
investment--once again, not on the basis of individual results but in
terms of the expectable group outcome.

The second approach is similar to the first in its underlying
philosophy. It consists of buying groups of stocks at less than their
current or intrinsic value as indicated by one or more simple
criteria. The criterion I prefer is seven times the reported earnings
for the past 12 months.  You can use others--such as a current
dividend return above seven per cent or book value more than 120
percent of price, etc. We are just finishing a performance study of
these approaches over the past half-century--1925-1975. They
consistently show results of 15 per cent or better per annum, or twice
the record of the DJIA for this long period. I have every confidence
in the threefold merit of this general method based on (a) sound
logic, (b) simplicity of application, and (c) an excellent supporting
record. At bottom it is a technique by which true investors can
exploit the recurrent excessive optimism and excessive apprehension of
the speculative public.

[NB: Graham appears to be talking about a portfolio consisting of
about 30 stocks]

p 37 When we come to valuing individual stocks I should like to divide
them into three classes, as I find them in the NYSE list. Group I is
the growth issues selling at more than 20 times their last 12 months'
earnings. Group II is the relatively unpopular sockes selling for less
than 7 times recent earnings - i.e. at 15% yield or better. Group III
has multipliers between 7 and 20. In my count of 1530 NYSE issues
there were 63, or 4% of the total, selling above 20 times earnings, of
which 24 passed the 30 times mark. By contrast, more that 500 - over a
third - sold below 7 times earnings and of there about 150 - say, 10%
of the total - were quoted under five times the last 12 months'
profits. If the earnings on which these multipliers are based can be
counted on, more or less, in the future - without any special
requirements as to growth - it is evident that many NYSE issues can
now compete in attractiveness with bonds at 8.5%.

I may be so bold as to suggest that this situation makes possible a
quite simple approach to equity investment that is open to almost
everyone from the small investor to the quite large pension fund
manager. This is the idea of buying selected common stocks - those
meeting additional criteria of financial strength, etc. - obtainable
at 2/3 or less of book value, and holding them for sale at their net
asset value - to show a non-spectacular but quite satisfactory 50%
profit. We cannot predict with assurance how this apparently too
simple investment program will work out in the future. But I can say
that my studies covering the period 1961 to 1974 sgiw tge oresebce if
sufficient opportunities of this kind in most years, and also
excellent overall results from the assumed operations.

p 39 Another distinction is that between current analysus and
long-term analysis. There is a tendency in the part of Wall Street
people to pay excessive attention to the most recent figures and the
present financial picture.

A word or two about asset component on earning power valuation. I will
not like to stress the following too much as it is not customarily
used and we have I have no particular reason for believing I am right,
but would the earning power value exceed the asset value then some
reduction should be made. I would suggest a reduction of a quarter of
the difference between the two. In cases where assets exceed earning
power we do not value the company upward, as we not very much
impressed by assets with no earnings power, with only one exception:
in cases where working capital alone exceeds earnings power. In this
case, we are inclined to add half the difference to the earning power
to allow for the excess working capital which in some way or other
tends to trickle down to stockholders over the years. This effect can
take place as a distribution, sale of property, company policy
changes, etc.


p 40 Valuation of Common Stocks

Of the various approaches to common stock valuation, the most widely
accepted is that which estimates the average earnings and dividends
for a period of years in the future and capitalizes these elements at
an appropriate rate. We may observe here that since there is no a
priori rule governing the number of years to which the value should
look forward in the future, it is almost inevitable that in bull
markets investors and analysts will tend to see far and hopefully
ahead, whereas at other times they will be so disposed to "heed the
rumble of a distant drum".

In security analysis the past is always being thrown out of the window
of theory and coming in again through the back door of practice.


p 41 It is the XY factor, or multiplier of past earnings, that my
students would dearly love to learn about and calculate. When I tell
them that there is no dependable method of finding this multiplier
they tend to be incredulous or to ask, "What good is security analysis
then?"

In this article, I propose to explain tow approached of this kind
which have been developed in a seminar on common-stock valuation. I
believe the first will illustrate reasonably well formula operations
of this kind may work out and applied. Ours is an endeavour to
establish a comparitive value in 1957 for each of the 30 stocks in the
Dow-Jones Industrial Average, related to a base valuation of 400 and
500, respectively, for the composite or group. (The 400 figure
represented the approximate "Central Value" of the DJIA, as found
separately by a whole series of formula methods derived from
historical relationships. The 500 figure represented about the average
market level for the preceding twelve months.

As will be seen, the valuations of each component issue take into
account the four "quality elements" of profitability, growth,
stability and dividend pay-out, applying them as multipliers to the
average earnings for 1947-1956. In addition, and entirely separatelym
a weight of 20% is given to the net asset value.

p 42


The second approach is essentially the reverse of that just
described. Whereas the first method attempts to derive an independent
value to be compared with the market price, the second starts with the
market price and calculates there from the rate of future growth
expected by the market. From that figure we readily derive the
earnings expected for the future period, in our case 1957-1966, and
hence the multiplier for such future earnings implicit in the current
market price.

(1) Our own "formula valuations" for the individual stocks, and
probably any others of the same general type, have little if any
utility in themselves, It would be silly to assert that Stock A is
"worth" only half its market price, or Stock B twice its market price,
because these figures result from our valuation formula.

(2) On the other hand, they may be suggestive and useful as composite
reflections of the past record, taken by itself. They may even be said
to represent what the value would be, assuming that the future were
merely a continuation of past performances.

(3) The analyst is thus presented with a "discrepancy" of definite
magnitude, between formula "value" and the price, which it becomes his
task to deal with in terms of his superior knowledge and judgment. The
actual size of these discrepancies, and the attitude that may possibly
be taken respecting them, are discussed below.

Similarly, the approach which starts from the market price, and
derives an implied "growth factor" and an implied multiplier
therefrom, may have utility in concentrating the analyst's attention
on just what the market seems to be expecting from each stock in the
future, in comparison or contrast with what it actually accomplished
in the past. Here again his knowledge and judgment are called upon
either to accept or reject the apparent assumptions of the market
place.

The first method consists of a formula valuation based solely on past
performance in relation to the Dow-Jones Industrial Average as a
group. The assumptions underlying this method are the following:

(1) Each component issue of the Dow-Jones Industrial Average may be
valued in relation to a base value of the average as a whole by a
comparison of the statistical records.

(2) The data to be considered are the following:


p 43

(a) Profitability--as measured by the rate of return on invested
capital. (For convenience this was computed only for the year 1956.)

(b) Growth of per-share earnings--as shown by two measurements:
1947-56 earnings vs. 1947 earnings, and 1956 earnings vs. 1947-56
earnings.  (It would have been more logical to have used the 1954-56
average instead of the single year 1956, but the change would have
little effect on the final valuations.)

(c) Stability--as measured by the greatest shrinkage of profits in the
periods 1937-1938 and 1947-1956.  (The calculation is based on the
percentage of earnings retained in the period of maximum shrinkage.)

(d) Payout--as measured by the ratio of 1956 dividends to 1956
earnings. In the few cases where the 1956 earnings were below the
1947-56 average we substituted the latter or the former, to get a more
realistic figure of current payout.

These criteria demonstrate the quality of the company's earnings (and
dividend policy) and thus may control the multiplier to be applied to
the earnings. The figure found under each heading is divided by the
corresponding figure for the Dow-Jones group as a whole, to give the
company's relative performance. The four relatives were then combined
on the basis of equal weights to give a final "quality index" of the
company as against the overall quality of the group.

The rate of earnings on invested capital is perhaps the most logical
measure of the success and quality of an enterprise. It tells how
productive are the dollars invested in the business. In studies made
in the relatively "normal" market of 1953 I found a surprisingly good
correlation between the profitability rate and the price-earnings
ratio, after introducing a major adjustment for the dividend payout
and a minor (moderating) adjustment for net asset value.

It is not necessary to emphasize the importance of the growth factor
to stock-market people.  They are likely to ask rather why we have not
taken it as the major determinant of quality and multipliers. There is
little doubt that the expected future growth is in fact the major
influence upon current price-earnings ratios, and this truth is fully
recognized in our second approach, which deals with growth
expectations as reflected in market prices. But the correlation
between market multipliers and past growth is by no means close.

The companies with high multipliers may not have had the best growth
in 1948-55, but most of them had greater than average stability of
earnings over the past two decades.

These considerations led us to adopt the simple arithmetical course of
assigning equal weight to past growth, past stability, and current
profitability in working out the quality coefficient for each
company. The dividend payout is not strictly a measure of quality of
earning power, though in the typical case investors probably regard it
in some such fashion. Its importance in most instances is undeniable,
and it is both convenient and plausible to give it equal weight and
similar treatment with each of the other factors just discussed.

The extent of these disparities naturally suggests that our method is
technically a poor one, and that more plausible valuations could be
reached--i.e., ones more congruous with market prices--if a better
choice were made of the factors and weights entering into the method.

p 46

It is quite evident from Table I that the stock market fixes its
valuation of a given common stock on the basis not of its past
statistical performance but rather of its expected future performance,
which may differ significantly from its past behavior. The market is,
of course, fully justified in seeking to make this independent
appraisal of the future, and for that reason any automatic rejection
of the market's verdict because it differs from a formula valuation
would be the height of folly. We cannot avoid the observation,
however, that the independent appraisals made in the stock market are
themselves far from infallible, as is shown in part by the rapid
changes to which they are subject. It is possible, in fact, that they
may be on the whole a no more dependable guide to what the future will
produce than the "values" reached by our mechanical processing of past
data, with all the latter's obvious shortcomings.

Let us turn now to our second mathematical approach, which concerns
itself with future growth, or future earnings, as they appear to be
predicted by the market price itself. We start with the theory that
the market price of a representative stock, such as anyone in the
Dow-Jones group, reflects the earnings to be expected in a future
period, times a multiplier which is in turn based on the percentage of
future growth. Thus an issue for which more than average growth is
expected will have this fact shown to a double degree, or "squared,"
in its market price--first in the higher figure taken for future
earnings, and second in the higher multiplier applied to those higher
earnings.

Let us turn now to our second mathematical approach, which concerns
itself with future growth, or future earnings, as they appear to be
predicted by the market price itself. We start with the theory that
the market price of a representative stock, such as anyone in the
Dow-Jones group, reflects the earnings to be expected in a future
period, times a multiplier which is in turn based on the percentage of
future growth. Thus an issue for which more than average growth is
expected will have this fact shown to a double degree, or "squared,"
in its market price--first in the higher figure taken for future
earnings, and second in the higher multiplier applied to those higher
earnings.

We shall measure growth by comparing the expected 1957-66 earnings
with the actual figures for 1947-56. Our basic formula says, somewhat
arbitrarily, that where no growth is expected the current price will
be 8 times both 1947-56 earnings and the expected 1957-66 earnings. If
growth G is expected, expressed as the ratio of 1957-66 to 1947-56
earnings, then the price reflects such next decade earnings multiplied
by 8 times G.

From these assumptions we obtain the simple formula:

Price equals (E x G) x (8 x G), or 8G sup 2 x E, where E is the
per-share earnings for 1947-56.

To find G, the expected rate of future growth, we have only to divide
the current price by 8 times 1947-56 earnings, and take the square
root.

Ten of the companies (plus AT&T) sold at prices anticipating at least
twice the Dow-ones Average rate of growth, comparing 1957-66 with
1956. Of these only two, Du Pont and General Electric, had actually
shown distinctly better than average growth in the last ten years.
Conversely, eight of the companies were indicating less than half the
average expected rate of growth, including five for which actual
declines from 1956 levels were apparently predicted. Yet of these
eight companies, no less than five had actually shown far greater than
average growth in the past decade.

This leads us to our final observations, which tie our two tables
together. The ten companies previously mentioned, for which unusually
rapid growth is anticipated, include seven of those shown in Table I
as selling significantly above their formula valuation. Again, the
eight for which subnormal or no growth is expected include six which
were selling substantially below their formula valuations.

Typically, the midpoint range of the value range has been found by
applying an appropriate multiplier to estimated future earnings. My
present view is that this is not the best technique.  Instead, the
earnings figure taken should be what we call "normal current
earnings", and all the future prospects - favorable or unfavorable,
specific or general - should enter into the multiplier.  This
procedural change obviates the necessity of establishing a future
value and then discounting same to its present worth.
