There's always something to do - the Peter Cundill Investment Approach

It was given to me as a review copy in March 2011.

p 19 As his summary at this time shows, he had not really made great progress, except perhaps through the elimination of many of the "dead ends":
* management's ability to predict earnings is universally poor.
* It is the strategic modelling behind a portfolio that matters most.
* One needs to develop a sense of spaced maturities in a common stock portfolio is a way that is comparable to a bond portfolio
* In a macro sense it may be more useful to spend time analysing industries instead of national or international economies
* It must be essential to develop and specify a precise investment policy that investors can understand and rely on the portfolio manager to implement.

p 23 For a twenty-year period up to 1955, Graham, through his
Graham-Newman fund, averaged more than 20% growth per annum using the
techniques that I shall describe below. Warren Buffett manged to
achieve a 30% growth rate for his shareholders, turning $100,000 into
$100 million between 1956 and 1969 when he returned the money to his
stockholders because he could find no more bargains in the market.


p 23 Based on my studies and experience, investments for the Venture Fund should only be made if most of the following criteria are met:
* The share price must be less than book value. Preferably it will be less than net working capital less long term debt.
* The price must be less than one half of the former high and preferably at or near its all time low
* The price earning multiple must be less than ten or the inverse of the long term corporate bond rate, whichever is the less.
* The company must be profitable. Preferably it will have increased its earnings for the past five years and there will have been no deficits over that period.
* The company must be paying dividends. Preferably the dividend will have been increasing and have been paid for some time.
* Long term debt and bank debt (including off-balance sheet financing) must be judiciously employed. There must be room to expand the debt position if required.

p 24 My own exposure to this type of investment procdure has been as
follows: On January 1st 1973, we started with $600,000 and, utilizing
these techniques, the unit value appreciate by 35.2%. During the same
period the All Canadian Venture Fund was down by 49%, the TSE
industrials by 20%, and the Dow Jones Industrial Index by 26%.

p 38 In the end the solution turned out to be something of a
compromise: the fund would automatically sell half any given position
when it had doubled, in effect thereby writing down the cost of the
remainder to zero with the fund manager then left with the full
discretion as to when to sell the balance.

p 57 We have completed 10 years using the graham and Dodd approach to investment. This period has witnessed a compound return on shareholder's equity of 26% per annuml. We have learned much during the past 10 years:
* The value method of investing will tend at least to give compound rates of return in the high teens over longer periods of time.

p 58 
* THE MOST IMPORTANT ATTRIBUTE FOR SUCCESS IN VALUE INVESTING IS PATIENCE, PATIENCE, AND MORE PATIENCE. THE MAJORITY OF INVESTORS DO NOT POSSESS THIS CHARACTERISTIC.

p 76 None of the great investments come easily. There is almost always
a mojor blip for whatever reason and we have learnt to expect it and
not to panic.

p 152
* Every company ought to have an escape valve: inventory that can readily be reduced, a division that can be sold, a marketable investment portfolio, an ability to shed staff quickly. That sort of thing. However, no escape valve will provide a cushion in the face of a collapse in investor confidence.
* The business must be getting better, not necessarily by a lot, just honestly better.

p 154 "we always look for the margin of safety in the balance sheet
and then worry about the business".

p 158 I talked to John Templeton about it afterwards and he took a
worse hit than us. He said "this is why we diversify, if you are right
60% of the time and wrong 40% you're always going to be a hero, if you
are right 40% of the time and wrong 60% you will be a bum". I think he
probably put it more elegantly than that.

p 181 In 2001 he collected the "Fund Manager of the Year" award from
Investment Executive, Canada's newspaper for financial advisors. In
December of the same year he was honoured at the Canadian Mutual Fund
Awards Glal dinner attended by six hundred investment
professionals. Billed as the highlight of the night and described as
the "Indiana Jones of Fund Managers", he received the Analyst's Choice
award as "The Greatest Mutual Fund Manager of All Time".

p 185 What makes a great investor? :

INSATIABLE CURIOSITY
"Curiosity is the engine of civilization. If I were to elaborate it be to say read, read, read, and don't forget to talk to people, really talk, listening with attention and having conversations, on whatever topic, that are an exchange of thoughts. Keep the reading broad, beyond just the professional. This helps to develop one's sense of perspective in all matters."

PATIENCE
"Patience, patience, and more patience."

p 186 

CONCENTRATION
"You must have the ability to focus and to block out distractions. I am talking about not getting carried away by events or outside influences - you can take them into account, but you must stick to the framework."

ATTENTION TO DETAIL
"Never make the mistake of not reading the small print, no matter how rushed you are."

CALCULATED RISK
"Be prepared to take risks but never gambles"

p 187
INDEPENDENCE OF MIND
"I think it is very useful to develop a contrarian cast of mind combined with a keen sense of what I would call "the natural order of things"."

HUMILITY
"I have not doubt that a strong sense of self belied is important - even a sense of mission - and this fine as long as it is tempered by a sense of humour, especially an ability to laugh at oneself. One of tghe greatest dangers that confront those who have been trhough a period of successful investmetn is hubris - the conviction that one can never be wrong again."

ROUTINES
"Routines and discipline go hand in hand."

MENS SANA IN CORPORE SANO
(a healthy mind in a healthy body)
For myself I have found that my exercise routines have contributed immensely towards giving me the mental resilience to get through tough times - and there always are tough times.

p 188
SCEPTICISM
"Scetpicism is good, but be a sceptic, not an iconoclast."

p 189
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILTY
"The ability to shoulder personal responsibility for one's investment results is pretty fundamental. This means that if you lose money it isn't the market's fault, it isn't some broker's fault, and it isnt' the fault of your research department or anyone else."

READING AGAIN
"There are a few books - really not that many - which I believ are indispensable reading for every serious investor in whatever facet of investment practice they may fabour:
* Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds
* The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind
* Buffett: The Making of an American Captialist
* The Money Masters
* The Intelligent Investor
* The Templeton Touch
* The Alchemy of Finance

p 199 Historically a corporation's book value was defined as its total assets less intangible assets (such as goodwill) and liabilities. More recently book value has sometimes been calculated with goodwill and other intangibles included, which is anathema to a value investor.

p 202 Cundill's corollary says that when Murphy's Law is till in play
one should wait, but when things get so bad that you're really scared,
that't the time to buy.

p 207 THE MAGIC SIXES "The magic sixes" are something Peter learned
from Normal Weiner of Oppenheimer in the 1970s. They are companies
trading at less than 0.6 times book value, 6 times earnings or less,
and with dividend yields of 6% or more. At that time there were
hundreds of publicly traded companies in the U.S. that met the
test. It is a quick formula that allows one to screen any stock market
in the world to see if it may have any value opportunities, applying
the Graham fundamentals.

p 208 "One of the dangers about net-net investing is that if you buy a
net-net that begins to lose money your net-net goes down and your
capacity to be able to make a profit becomes less secure. So the trick
is not necessarily to predict what the earnings are going to be but to
have a clear conviction that the company isn't going bust and that
your margin of safety will remain intact over time."

p 212 Over the past thrity-five years, since its inception in 1974,
the Mackenzie Cundill Value Fund (Series A) has delivered a rate of
return of 13.2%, while the MSCI World Index returns in Canadian dollar
terms for the same period are 10.8%.

p 215
"I pay much more attention to the balance sheet than the profit and loss statement and am always looking for hidden assets on the books"

"We do liquidation analysis and liquidation analysis only".

"Ninety to 95% of all my investing meets the Graham tests. The times I
strayed from a rigoruous application of this philosophy I got myself
into trouble."

"We customarily do three thests: one of them asset-based - the NAV,
using the company's balance sheet. The second is the sum of the parts,
which I think is probably the most important part that goes into the
balance sheet I'm creatint. And then a future NAV, which is making a
stab (which I am always suspicious about) at what you think the
business might be doing in three years from now"

p219 When asked if he would beyond the US border in his search for a
new chief investment office, Mr Buffett said he wouldn't rule out a
Canadian candidate: "Someone like a Peter Cundill."

p 227 contains an investment graph of Cundill's fund against the MSCI
World benchmark (C$), starting in 1974, and ending 30 Sep 2010. The
fund was above the index most of the time, although in mid-86 they
were neck-and-neck. So, 12 years after the fund started, you still
would not have been appreciably better than the index. The fund pulled
away a bit, until 1998, when the index once again caught up with the
fund.The index then did better until 2000 (fully 26 years after the
commencement of the fund), at which point the fund overtook the index
resoundingly. At the end of the period, $10,000 invested would be
worth $927,522, against the index of $427,438. The fund returned a
CAAR of 13.5%, against the index of 11.2%. So, it's really only in the
last 10 years that the fund beat the market - a time which value seems
to have dominated.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Book review on on Peter Cundill
There's Always Something To Do - The Peter Cundill Investment Approach
by Christopher Risso-Gill
McGill-Queen's University Press

Peter Cundill established the Cundill Fund in 1974, later renamed the Mackenzie Cundill Value 'A' Fund. Tragically, he died in March 2011, and this book recounts his investment career and philosophy. The author has known Peter for thirty years, and had access to Peter's investment notebooks, snippets of which are reproduced in this book.

Since inception in 1974 to the period ended 30 September 2010, the Cundill Fund returned a 13.5% CAAR, compared with an 11.2% CAAR for the MSCI World Index, adjusted to Canadian dollars. An investment of $10,000 at the inception of the fund would now be worth $927,522, compared with the index of $437,428. It appears that much of the truly superior returns were achieved over the last 10 years.

The book reveals that Peter was a value investor in the Graham tradition, and was particularly fond of "net-nets". His search for them took him all over the globe, an activity that he seemed to enjoy greatly. He formed a personal relationship with legendary investor John Templeton, and was praised by Warren Buffett as the kind of man he would be looking for as his next chief investment officer. He has been described at the "Indiana Jones of Fund Managers".

This book will appeal to investors wanting to learn more about the history of Peter and his fund, as it is not so much of a "how-to" book on investing. He does reveal some of his personal investment philosophy, though, and shares his thoughts about what makes a great money manager. Chief amongst them is "patience, patience, and more patience". He warns that "None of the great investments come easily. There is almost always a major blip for whatever reason and we have learnt to expect it and not to panic".
