You can be a stock market Genius
Joel Greenblatt

p 0 - 182 TODO

p 182
CORPORATE RESTRUCTURINGS

The type of restructurings that provide the most clear-cut investment opportunities are where companies sell or close major divisions to staunch losses, pay off debt, or focus on more promising lines of business. Often the division being sold/liquidated has hidden the value of the other businesses. 

Example: Suppose a business earns $2 a share, made up profitable divisions of $3, and a loss-making one of $1. If a company is trading at $26, it has a 13 PER. If the loss-making division was sold or liquidated with no net liability, the company would earn $3, and its its PER would be 9. If the disposal resulted in positive net proceeds, so much the better.

Benefits are similar to spinoffs:
* more focused enterprise which can offer real advantages to both:
** company - who can focus on more limited and promising operataions
** shreholders - who may be willing to pay for a more specialised and profitable business

Comapnies that persue major restructurings are often among the most shareholder oriented. unless a company is in extreme distress, just making the decision to sell a major division is an extremely difficult thing to do. Most managements that go through with such a plan have their eye on shareholder interests.

Two ways of taking advantages of restructurings:
* invest in a situation after a major restructuring has been announced. There is often ample opportunity to invest in a situation after an announcement, because it usually takes time for the marketplace to fully understand the ramifiactions. The smaller tha market cap, the more time and opportunity you have to take advantage fo the situation.
* invest in a company that is ripe for restruturing. This is much more difficult. Greenblatt doesn't usually seek these situations.

Case Study: Greenman Brothers

An example of a "ripe opportunity"

Greenman was a marginally profitable wholesale ditributor that happened to own a small chain of "Noodle Kidoodle", a new venture with a growth story if the first stores proved successful. 

The stock was trading at $5, and had a book value of $8. Most of Greenman's assets were in cash, receivables and inventory - assets that could be readily sold.

Greenman had disclosed its plans to greatly expand Noodle. 

For over a year, the stock went nowhere, trading from $4 to $7. During that time, Noodle opened an additional 15 stores, bringing it to 20 stores by the end of 1995. During that time, the distribution business got worse. By Mazy 1995, more than a year after Greenblatt's initial purchase, the stock was still trading below $6. Then, Geenman announced the possible sale of its distribution business. In a press release, it said that the sale would "free up capital that would be need to grow Noodle". The stock moved to $11 in 2 months and to $14 within 4 months. Greenblat sold in the $11-$14 range. He was happy to sell out becasue plenty could still go wrong.

Was it luck? Managment could have taken longer to restructure the business or there might have been no restructuring at all. However, there were 3 qualities that made it attractive:
* limited downside
* a business to resturure around - i.e. jettisoning distribution, and focussing on Noodle
* a catalyst - namely, a new concept that would require funding. The disposal of the deteriorating distribution business was an obvious source

Greenblatt says that it is a bad idea to set out to find petential restructurings, as it is not very fruitful. It is better to "know one when you see one". The opportunities are few and far between

Case study - General Dynamics

An example of an announced restructuring. Greenblatt became involved it it after the stock had nearly tripled.
