Value Investing From Braham To Buffett and Beyond
by Bruce Greenwald, Judd Kahnm Paul Sonkin, Michael van Biema

p18 From 1952 through 1994, the top 50 selected on the basis of
relative strength bested the market as a whole by an average of 3.7%
pa (O'Shaghnessy, 1994, p 193).

p 19 But momentum plays out fairly quickly. When stocks are selected
on the basis of price change over three prior years, rather than last
year alone, the results are different: the worse do better.

p 22 A standard measure of the small capitalization discount compares
the price to earnings (P/E) ratio for companies in the S&P500 to the
P/E multiple of a small cap index (e.g. Salomon Smith Barney Emerging
Growth Index). The ratio varies over time, but generally the small cap
P/Es are higher, befitting their more realistic prospects for
growth. In 1983, just after the start of the longest bull market in US
history, the small cap P/E ratio reached a pinnacle of more than 2.3
time the P/E of the S&P 500. That marked the end of small cap superior
performance. By the end of 1998, the ratio had fallen along a vary
jagged course to around 1 to 1.

p 39 Using these assumptions, the equation for the earnings power
value (EPV) of a company is EPV = Adjusted Earnings * 1 /R, where R is
the current cost of capital. Because the cash flow is assumed to be
constant, the growth rate G is zero.

p 45 Careful investigation can determine which of these conditions,
poor management, or excess capacity, is responsible. If it is poor
management, then potential value may be unlocked by a catalyst, such
as a takeover or even the threat of one, that will either bring in new
faces or concentrate the attention of the incumbents. If the problem
is overcapacity, the firm's value will increase no faster than the
rate at which the excess capacity is absorbed by new demand or
eliminated as assets decay and are not replaced. In both situations,
the true value investor will ignore the higer asset value and use the
lower earnings power figure as his or her measure of the firm's
intrinisc value. he or she will also look to purchase shares when the
market prices them far enough below this intrinsic value to provide a
sufficient margin of safety. Discrepancies between asset value and EPV
suggest both an opprtunity and a caution. If the gap can be closed
because of better management, then the intrinsic value of the firm
will increase, which should be quickly reflected in its market price
because the earnings will grow (i.e. return to normal). On the other
hand, the fact that the assets are not producing the earnings they
should may indicate that the firm is operating at a competitive
disadvantage. If the firm raises additional capital to invest in
growth, that investment will tend to destroy rather than add value.


p 177 My [Buffett] first mistake, of course, was in buying control of
Berkshire. Though I new its business - text manufacturing - to be
unpromising, I was enticed to buy because the price looked
cheap. Stock purchases of that kind had proved reasonably rewarding in
my early years, though by the time Berkshire came along in 1965 I was
becoming aware that the strategy was not ideal.


p 178 I [Buffett] could give you other personal examples of
"bargain-purchase" folly but I'm sure you get the picture: It's far
batter to buy a wonderful company at a fair price than a fair company
at a wonderful price.

p 190 We extend this business-valuation approach even to bond
purcahses such as WPPSS. We compare the $139m cost of our yearend
investment in WPPS to a similar $139m investment in an operating
business. In the case of WPPSS, the "business" contractually earns
$22.7m after tax (via the interest paid on the bonds), and those
earnings are available to us curently in cash. We are unable to buy
operating businesses with economics close to these. Only a relatively
few businesses earn the 16.3% after tax on unleveraged capital that
our WPSS investment does and those businesses, when available for
purchase, sell at large premiums to that capital. In the average
negotiated business transaction, unleveraged corporate earnings of
$22.7m after-tax (equivalient to about $45m pre-tax). For a business
we understand well and strongly like, we will gladly pay that
much. But it is double the price we paid to realise the same earnings
from WPSS bonds.

