The Little Book That Beats The market
Joel Greenblatt

p 25 The earnings from your share of the profits must give you more money than you would receive by placing that same amount of money in a risk-free 10-year U.S. government bond. (Remember: Last chapter we set 6 percent as your absolute minimum annual return when government bond rates fall below 6 percent)

p 53 The formula starts with a list of the largest 3500 companies available for trading on one of the major u.s. stock exchanges. it then assigns a rank to those companies, from 1 to 3500, based on their return on capital. the company whose business had the highest return on capital would be assigned a rank of 1, and the company with the lowest return on capital )probably a company actually losing money) would receive a rank of 3500. Similarly, the company that had the 232nd best return on capital would be assigned a rank of 232.

p 54 Next, the forumula follows the same procedure, but this time, the ranking is down using earnings yield. the company with the highest earnings yield is assigned a rank of 1, and the company with the lowest earnings yiled receives a rank of 3500. ... Finally, the formula just combines the rankings. The formula isn looking for the company that ranks best on return on capital or the one with the higest earnings yield. Rather, the formula looks for the companies that have the best combination of the two factors. so, a company that ranked 232nd best in return on capital and 153rd highest in earnings yield would receive a combined ranking of 385 (232+153).

p 56 Table 6.1 magic Forumla Results

        Magic      market    S&P
       formula    average    500
1988    27.1%      24.8%    16.6%
1989    44.6       18.0     31.7
1990    1.7       -16.1     -3.1
1991    70.6       45.6     30.5
1992    32.4       11.4     7.6
1993    17.2       15.9     10.1
1994    22.0       -4.5     1.3
1995    34.0       29.1     37.6
1996    17.3       14.9     23.0
1997    40.4       16.8     33.4
1998    25.5       -2.0     28.6
1999    53.0       36.1     21.0
2000     7.9      -16.8     -9.1
2001    69.6       11.5    -11.9
2002    -4.0      -24.2    -22.1
2003    79.9       69.8     28.7
2004    19.3       17.8     10.9
        30.8%      12.3%    12.4%
The "market average" return is an equally weighted index of our 3500 stock universe. the s&p 500 is a market-weighted index of 500 large stocks.

p 59 Often, small companies have very few shares available for purchase, and even a small amount of demand for those shares can push the prices higher. if that's the case, the formula may look great on paper, but in the real world, the fantastic results can't be replicated. that' why it's important that the companies chosen by the magic forula be pretty large.

last chapter, the magic formula rankied 3500 of the largest companies available for trading on the major u.s. stock exhanges. the formula then chose its favorite stocks from that group. even the very smallest of those 3500 companies still had a market value over $50m. with companies of that size, individual investors should be able to buy a reasonable number of shares without pushing prices higher.

p 60 but let's see what happens when we raise the bar a little bit. it would certainly be nice if the magic formula worked for companies whether they were large or small. that way we could be more confident that the basic principle of buying good companies at bargain prices works for companies of any size. so insteade of choosing from the largest 3500 comapnies, let's look at just the largest 2500 companies. The smallest companies in this group have a market value of at least $200m.

over the last 17 years (endingin december 2004), the magic formula worked remarkably well for this group of larger companies, too. owning a portfolio of 30 stocks chosen by the magic formula would have achieved an annual return of 23.7 percent. during th same period, the market's average return for this group was 12.4 percent per year. in other words, the magic formula practically doubled the market's average annual return.

but what if we take it one step further? let's look back and see what happened when we narrowed the group to just the largest 1000 stocks - only the companies with market values over $1b. Even large institutional investors like mutual funds and large pension funds can buy these stocks. Well, take a look at this! (see table 7.1)

p 61 table 7.1 magic formula results (largest 1000 stocks)

         magic     market    s&p
       formula    average    500
1988     29.4%     19.6%    16.6%
1989     30.0      27.6     31.7
1990     -9.0      -7.1     -3.1
1991     51.5      34.4     30.5
1992     16.4      10.3      7.6
1993      0.5      14.4     10.1
1994     15.3       0.5      1.3
1995     55.9      31.4     37.6
1996     37.4      16.2     23.0
1997     41.0      19.6     33.4
1998     32.6       9.9     28.6
1999     14.4      35.1     21.0
2000     12.8     -14.5     -9.1
2002    -25.3     -22.7    -22.1
2003     50.5      41.4     28.7
2004     27.6      17.3     10.9
         22.9%     11.7%    12.4%
		 
p 63 now what if we divided thoise 2500 companies into 10 equal groups based on their rankings? in other words, group 1 would contain the 250 comapnies that the magic formula viewed as good companies at bargrain prices, group 2 would be the second-highest-ranked group of 250 companies, and so on. group 10, therefore, would be a group of 250 stocks that the magic formula ranked as being poor companies at expensive prices.

p 64 so what would happen if we did this every month for 17 years? what if we held each of those stock portfolios (each containing roughly 250 stocks) for one year and calculated returns? well, take a look (see table 7.2)

table 7.1 annualized return (1988-2004)
    group 1   17.9%
    group 2   15.6
	group 3   14.8
	group 4   14.2
	group 5   14.1
	group 6   12.7
	group 7   11.3
	group 8   10.1
	group 9    5.2
	group 10   2.5
	
p 69 Well, first, here's some really good news. As it turns out, there
are plenty of times when the magic formula doesn't work at all! Isn't
that great? In fact, on average, in five months out of each year, the
magic formula portfolio does worse than the overall market. But forget
months. Often, the magic formula doesn't work for a full year or even
more. That's even better!

Now imagine deciding enough is enough. No more trusting that stupid
book or that mindless computer, you're going to roll up your sleeves
and investigate the companies you purchased and the outlook for the
businesses you actually own. As we'll find out later, imagine the
horror when you realise that if you had only investigated these
companies for a few minutes before buying your shares, there is no way
you would have touched many of them. Finally, despite awful
performance and the disagreeable prospects of the stocks that you own,
imagine vowing to continue following the advice of that stupid book
and that mindless computer!

p 70 the magic formula portfolio fared poorly relative to the market averages in 5 out of every 12 months tested. for full-year periods, the magic formula failed to beat the market averages once every four years. for one out of every six periods tested, the magic formula did poorly more than two years in a row. during those wonderful 17 years for the magic formula, there were even some periods when the formula did worse than the overall market for three years in a row!

p 71 the fund then prcoeeded to perform worse than the major market averages for two of its first three years. for one of those years, the fund underperfomed the market average by 25 percent! after three yeareas, the fund was performing poorly relative to competing funds and the best-selling author - the guy who did the tests, the guy who wrote the book - decided to sell his fund management company to somebody else! in fairness, i don't think the author gave up on his formula, but clearly he saw better opportunites elsewhere! had he known that that same fund, the one managed strictly according to his formula, would come back over the next three years to one of the top-performing mutual funds since the time of its inception (even including the tough first few years), perhaps he would have stuck with it longer!

p 83 but here's the thing. if capitalism is such a tough system, how does the magic formula find us companies that are able to earn a high return on capital in the first place? to earn a high return on capital even for one year, it's likely that, at least temporarily, there's something special about that company's business. otherwise, competition would alread have driven down returns on capital to lower levels.

p 84 it could be that the company has a relatively new business concept (perhaps a candy store that sells only gum), or a new product (like a hot video game), or a better product (such as an ipod that's smaller and easier to use than the competitors' products), a good brand name (people will happily pay more for coke than for joe's cola, so coke can charge more than joe's and continue to earn a high return on capital despite having competition), or a company could have a very strong competitive position (ebay was one fo the first auctiojn web sites and has more buyers and sellers than anyone else, so it's hard for new auction sites to offer the same benefits to customers).

in short, companies that achieve high return on capital are likely to have a special advantage of some kind. that special advantage keeps competitiors from destroying the ability to earn above-average profits.

p 85 but, on average, the high-return-on-capital companies chosen by the magic formula are more likely to have the opportunity to reinvest a portion of their profits at high rates of return. they are more likely to have tha ability to achieve high rates of earnings growth. they are also more likely to have some special competitive advantage that will allow them to continue to earn above-average return on captial. in other words, on average, the magic formula is finding us good companies!

p 91 as we discussed, over one-year periods, the magic formula stock portfolios underperformed the market averages in one out of every four years tested. following the formula for any two-year period in a row (starting with any month during the 17 years), the magic formula underperfomds the market averages in one out of every six periods tests. remember, whilst that may not sound all that bad, underperforming for two years in a row is acutally pretty hard to take! but here comes the good news. following the formula for any three-year period in a row, the magic formula beat the market averages 95 percent of the time 9160 out of the 169 three-year periods tested).

but that's not all! over three-year periods, if you followed the magic formula, you would never have lost money. that's right. sticking with the magic formula for any three-year period during those 17 years, you would have made money 100 percent of the time (169 out of 169 three-year periods).

p 93 when thinking about risk, rather than making things unnecessarily complicated, there are really two main things you should want to know about an investment strategy:
1. what is the risk of losing money following that strategy over the long term?
2. what is the risk that you chosen strategy will perform worse than alternative strategies over the long term?

p 101 To calculate these ratios, the magic formula doesn't look at future earnings. That's too hard. The magic formula uses last year's earnings.

The funny thing is, that seems like the wrong thing to do. The value of a company comes from how much money it will earn for us in the future, not from what happened in the past. If a company earned $2 per share last year, put will earn only $1 per share this year and even less in the future, using last year's earnings to calculate earnings yield and return on captial will be very misleading. But that's precisely what the magic formula does!

In fact, often the near-term prospects for the companies selected by the magic formula don't look so good. In many cases, the outlook for the next year or two is downright ugly. But that's one reason the magic formula can find comapnies whose prices /seem/ like bargains. The magic formula uses last year's earnings. If, instead, estimates for this year's or next year's earnings were used, many of the companies selected by the magic formula might not look like such bargains at all!

p 102 So what /should/ we be doing? Ideally, better than blindly plugging in last year's earnings to the formula, we should be plugging in estimates for earnings in a normal year. A normal year is one in which nothing extraordinary or unusual is happening within the company, its industry, or the overall economy. Of course, last year's earnings could be representative of a normal year, but last year may not have been typical for a number of reasons. Earnings could have been higher than normal due to extraordinary favourable conditions that may not be repeated in most years. Alternatively, there may have been a temporary problem with the company's operations, and earnings may have been lower than in a normal year.

p 103 We could then compare the earnings yield based on normal earnings to a risk-free 6 percent government bond and to our other investment opportunities.

Does that soulnd hard to do? Well, it is. Yet it's not impossible. There /are/ people who can do this type of analysis. In fact, this is precisely the way my partners and I use the principles behind the magic formula to make our won investment decisions. But if you can't do this type of analysis (and here comes the main point of this chapter): 
     You have no business investing in individual stocks on your own!
That's right. forget about it!

But wait a second. The magic formula does pretty well, and it just uses last year's earnings. it doesn't make any estimates, and it doesn't even do any thinking. How come the magic formula gets to pick stocks and I'm telling most of you to just forget about picking individual sotcks on your own?

p 104 Well, the anser is that the magic formula doesn't pick individual stocks, either. It picks many stocks at one time. Looking at a whole portfolio of stocks, it turns out that using last year's earnings is often a good indicator of what earnings will look like in the future. Of course, for inidvidual companies, this may not be the case. But on average, lst year's earnings will often probide a pretty good estimate for normal earnings going forward.

That's why, if we actually use the magic formula, we'll want to own 20 or 30 stocks at one time. In the magic formula's case, we want the average (that is, the average return for a portfolio of stocks chosen by the magic formula).

p 105 So here's my suggestion. If you still want to buy individual stocks despite all the warnings, don't even try to make a lot of predictions. Limit your stock investments to a small number of "good" companies that are available at bargain leels. For those few investors who /are/ capable of estimating normal earnings several years into the future and placing values on businesses, owning just a handful of bargain-priced stocks is the best way to go. As a general rule of thumb, if you are truly doing good research and have a good understanding of the companies you purchase, owning just five to eight stocks in different industries can safely make up at least 80 percent of your total portfolio.

p 106 Rather than just blindly choosing stocks that catch your fancy or blindly accepting the output of the magic formula, how about combining both strategies? Start with the magic formula and put together a list of top-ranked stocks. Then choose a few of your favourites by whatever method you want. You must, however, choose solely from the top 50 or 100 stocks as ranked by the magic formula. Using this method, you should still place at least 10 to 30 stocks in your portfolio (the lower end of this range if you actually know something about evaluating businesses and the higher end if you are choosing stocks based on birth signs). And that should do it.

p 133 One screening option was created specifically for this book, magicformulainvesting.com .

p 134 Option 1: MagicFormulaInvesting.com

Step 1
Go to magicformulainvesting.com

Step 2
Follow the instructions for choosing company size (e.g. companies with market capitalisations over $50m, or over $200m, or over $1b, etc.)> For most individuals, companies with market capitalizations above $50m or $100m should be of sufficient size.

Step 3
Follow the instructions to obtain a list of top-rated magic formula companies.

Step 4
Buy five to seven top-ranked companies. to start, invest only 20 to 33 percent of the money you intend to invest during the first year (for smaller amounts of capital, lower-priced web brokers such as foliofn.com, buyandhold.com, and scottrade.com may be a good place to start).

Step 5
Repeat step 4 every two or three months until you have invested all of the money you have chosen to allocate to your magic formula portfolio. After 9 or 10 months, this should result in a portfolio of 20 to 30 stocks (.e.g. seven stocks every three months, five or six stocks every two months).

p 135

Step 6
Sell each stock after holding it for one year. For taxable accounts sell winners after holding them for a few days more than one year and sell losers after holding them for a few days less than one year (as previously described). Use the proceeds from any sale and additioanl investment money to replace the sold companies with an equal number of new magic formula selections (step 4).

Step 7
Continue this process for many years, Remember, you must be committed to continuing this process for a minimum of three to five years, regardless of the results. Otherwise, you will most likely quit before the magic formula has a chance to work!

Step 8
Feel free to write and thank me.

Option 2: General Screening Instructions

If using any screening option other than magicformula.com, you should take the following steps to best approximate the results of the magic formula:

p 136

* use Return On Assets (ROA) as a screening criterion. Set the minimum ROA at 25%. (This will take the place of return on capital from the magic formula study).
* From the resulting group of high ROA stocks, screen for those stocks with the lowest Price/Earnings (P./E) ratios, (This will take the place of earnings yield from the magic formula study).
* Eliminate all utilities and financial stocks (i.e. mutual funds, banks and insurance companies) from the list
* Eliminate all foregin companies from the list. In most cases, these will have the suffic "ADR" (for "American Depository Receipt") after the name of the stock
* If a stock has a very low P/E ration, say 5 or less, that may indicate that the previous year or the data being used are unusual in some way. You may want to eliminate these stocks from your list. You may also want to eliminate any company that has announced earnings in the last week. (This should help minimize the incidence of incorrect or untimely data).
* After otaining you list, follow steps 4 and 8 from the magicformulainvesting.com instruction page.


p 138 The Magic Formula

the magic formula ranks companies based on two factors: return on capital and earnings yield. these factors can be measured in several different ways. The measures chosen for the study in this book are described in more detail as follows. For purposes of the study, earnings-related numbers were based on the latest 12-month period, balance sheet items were based on the most recent balance sheet, and market prices were based on the most recent closing price. Utilities, financial stocks and companies where we could not be certain that the information in the database was timely or complete were eliminated. Adjustments were alsom makde for certain non-interest bearing liabilities. The study was structured so that an average of 30 stocks was held during the study period. Stocks with only limited liquidity were eliminated from the study. Market caps were determined based on 2003 dollars. Both the number of companies in each decile as well as the numbers of companies in each market cap group fluctuated as the number of companies in the database varied during the study period.

1. Return on Capital

EBIT/(Net working capital + net fixed assets)

Return on capital was measured by calculating the ratio of pre-tax operating earnings (EBIT) to tangible capital employed (net working capital + net fixed assets). This ratio was used rather than the more commonly used ratios of return on equity (ROE, earnings/equity) or return on assets (ROA, earnings/assets) for several reasons.

p 139 EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes) was used in place of reported earnings because companies operate with different levels of debt and differing tax rates. Using operating earnings before interest and taxes, or EBIT, allowed us to view and compare the operating earnings of different companies without the distortions arising from differences in tax rates and debt levels. For each company, it was then possible to compare actual earnings from operations (EBIT) to the cost of the assets used to produce those earnings (tangible captial employed). For purposed of the study and in the interest of simplicity, it was assumed that depreciation and amortisation expense (noncash charges against earnings) were roughly equal to maintenance captial spending requirements (cash expenses not charged against earnings). It was, therefore, assumed that:

EBITDA - maintenance cap/expenditures = EBIT.

Net working capital + net fixed assets (or tangible capital employed) was used in place of total assets (used in an ROA calcualtion) or quity (used in an ROE calcualtion). The idea here was to figure out how much capital is acutally needed to conduct the company's business. Net working capital was used because a company has to fund its receivables and inventory (excess cash not needed to conduct the business was excluded from this calcualtion) but does not have to lay out money for its payables, as these are effectively an interest-free loan (short-term interesting bearnign debt was excluded from current liabilities for this calculation). In addision to working capital requirements, a compnay must also fund the purchase of fixed assets necessary to conduc its business, such as real estate, plant, and equipment, The depreciated net cost of these fixed assets was then added to the net working capital requirements already calculated to arrive at an estimate for tangible capital emplyed.

p 140 NOTE: Intangible assets, specifically goodwill, were excluded from the tangible capital employed calculations. Goodwill usually arises as a result of an acquisition of another company. The cost of an acqusition in excess of the tangible assets acquired is usually assigned to a goodwill account. In order to conduct its future business, the acquiring company usually has to replace tangible assets, such as plant and equipment. Goodwill is a historical cost that does not have to be constantly replaced. Therefore, in most cases, return on tangible capital alone (excluding goodwill) will be a more accurate reflection of  a business's return on captial going forward. The ROE and ROA calculations used by many investment analysts are therefore often distorted by ignoring the difference between reported equity and assets and tangible equity and assets in addtion to distortions dur to differing tax rates and debt levels.

p 141 2 Earnings Yield

EBIT/ Enterprise Value

Earnings yield was measured by calculating the ratio of pre-tax earnings (EBIT) to enterprise value (market value of equity (including preference equity) + net interest-bearing debt). This ratio was used rather than the more commonly used P/E ratio (price/earnings ratio) or E/P ratio (earnings/price ratio) for several reasons. The basic idea behind the concept of earnings yield is simply to figure out how much business earns relative to the purchase price of the business.

Enterprise Value was used instead of merely the price of equity (i.e. total market capitalization, share price multiplied by shares outstanding) because enterprise value takes into account both the price paid for an equity stake in abusiness as well as the debt financing used by a company to help generate the operating earnings. By using EBIT (which looks at acutal operaitng earnings befor interest expense and taxes) and comparing it to enterprise value, we can calculate the pre-tax earnings yield on the full purchase price of a business 9i.el. pre-tax operating earnings relative to the price of equity plus any debt assumed). This allows us to put companies with different levels of debt and different tax rates on a equal footing when comparing earnings yields.

p 151

One of the most significant recent studies, conducted by Joesph Piotroski at the Univeristy of Chicago (Piotroski, J. "Value Investing: the Use of Historical Financial Statements to Separate Winners from Losers", Journal of Accounting Research, vol 38, supplement, 2000), took price/book analysis one step further. Piotroski observed that while low price/book stocks beat the market on average, less than half of the stocks selected following this strategy actually outperformed the market. By using simple and readily available accounting metrics, piotroski wondered whether he could improve the results of a generic price/book strategy. Piotroski rated the top quintile of low price/book sotcks 9i.el. the cheapest 20 percent) using nine different measures of financial health. These included measures of profitability, operating efficiency, and balance sheet strength. The results over the 21-year study were spectacular ... with one exception.

for larger stocks, it didn't really work. For the largest one-third of stocks by market capitalization (this is equivalent in the magic formula study to stocks with market capitalization over approx. $700m(, the highest-ranked stocks on Piotroski's nin-point scale did not significantly outperform the average low price/book stock. This is not surprisingk, either. As already mentioned, it's just easier to find mispriced stocks among the smaller- and mid-cap issues.
