Margin of Safety
Seth Klarman
Started 01-Jan-2012
http://www.my10000dollars.com/MS.pdf


p 108 When the underlying value changes, when management reveals
itself to be incompetent or corrupt, or when the price appreciates to
more fully reflect underlying business value, a disciplined investor
can reevaluate the situation and, if appropriate, sell the
investment. Huge sums have been lost by investors who have held on to
securites after the reason for owning them is no longer valid. In
investing it is never wrong to change your mind. It is only wrong to
change your mind and do nothing about it.

page ?? - Unlike return, however, risk is no more quantifiable at the
end of an investment than it was at its beginning. Risk simply
cannot be described by a single number. Intuitively we understand
that risk varies from investment to investment: a government
bond is not as risky as the stock of a high-technology
company. But investments do not provide information about
their risks the way food packages provide nutritional data.

Rather, risk is a perception in each investor's mind that
results from analysis of the probability and amount of potential
loss from an investment. If an exploratory oil well proves to be
a dry hole, it is called risky. If a bond defaults or a stock plunges
in price, they are called risky. But if the well is a gusher, the
bond matures on schedule, and the stock rallies strongly, can we
say they weren't risky when the investment was made? Not at
all. The point is, in most cases no more is known about the risk
of an investment after it is concluded than was known when it
was made.


p 133/121 To be a value investor, you must buy at a discount from underlying
value. Analyzing each potential value investment opportunity
therefore begins with an assessment of business value.
While a great many methods of business valuation exist,
there are only three that I find useful. The first is an analysis of
going-concern value, known as net present value (NPV) analysis.
NPV is the discounted value of all future cash flows that
a business is expected to generate. A frequently used but flawed
shortcut method of valuing a going concern is known as
private-market value. This is an investor's assessment of the
price that a sophisticated businessperson would be willing to
pay for a business. Investors using this shortcut, in effect, value
businesses using the multiples paid when comparable businesses
were previously bought and sold in their entirety.

p 134/122
The second method of business valuation analyzes liquidation
value, the expected proceeds if a company were to be dismantled
and the assets sold off. Breakup value, one variant of
liquidation analysis, considers each of the components of a
business at its highest valuation, whether as part of a going concern
or not.

The third method of valuation, stock market value, is an estimate
of the price at which a company, or its subsidiaries considered
separately, would trade in the stock market. Less reliable
than the other two, this method is only occasionally useful as a
yardstick of value.

Each of these methods of valuation has strengths and weaknesses.
None of them provides accurate values all the time.
Unfortunately no better methods of valuation exist. Investors
have no choice but to consider the values generated by each of
them; when they appreciably diverge, investors should generally
err on the side of conservatism.

p 140/128 [Private-Market Value] Within a given business or industry
all companies are not the same, but private-market value fails to
distinguish among them. Moreover, the multiples paid to acquire
businesses vary over time; valuations may have changed since the most
recent similar transaction. Finally, buyers of businesses do not
necessarily pay reasonable, intelligent prices.

p 141/129 The validity of private-market value depends on the
assumption that businesspeople know what they are doing. 

p 142/130 Investors who mistakenly equated inflated takeover prices
with reliable private-market values were lured into overpaying for
stocks and junk bonds in the mid-1980s.

p 143/131 My personal rule is that investors should value businesses
based on what they themselves, not others, would pay to own them. At
most, private- market value should be used as one of several inputs in
the valuation process and not as the exclusive final arbiter of value.

p 157/145 stocks should simply not be bought on the basis of their
dividend yield. Too often struggling companies sport high dividend
yields, not because the dividends have been increased, but because the
share prices have fallen. Fearing that the stock price will drop
further if the dividend is cut, managements maintain the payout,
weakening the company even more.

p 162/152 Value investing encompasses a number of specialized
investment niches that can be divided into three categories:
securities selling at a discount to breakup or liquidation value,
rate-of-return situations, and asset-conversion opportunities. Where
to look for opportunities varies from one of these categories to the
next.  Computer-screening techniques, for example, can be helpful in
identifying stocks of the first category: those selling at a discount
from liquidation value. Because databases can be out of date or
inaccurate, however, it is essential that investors verify that the
computer output is correct.

Risk arbitrage and complex securities comprise a second category of
attractive value investments with known exit prices and approximate
time frames, which, taken together, enable investors to calculate
expected rates of return at the time the investments are
made. Mergers, tender offers, and other risk-arbitrage transactions
are widely reported in the daily financial press-the Wall Street
Journal and the business section of the New York Times-as well as in
specialized newsletters and periodicals.  Locating information on
complex securities is more difficult, but as they often come into
existence as byproducts of risk arbitrage transactions, investors who
follow the latter may become aware of the former.

Financially distressed and bankrupt securities, corporate
recapitalizations, and exchange offers all fall into the category of
asset conversions, in which investors' existing holdings are exchanged
for one or more new securities. Distressed and bankrupt businesses are
often identified in the financial press; specialized publications and
research services also provide information on such companies and their
securities. Fundamental information on troubled companies can be
gleaned from published financial statements and in the case of
bankruptcies, from court documents. Corporate recapitalizations and
exchange offers can usually be identified from a close reading of the
daily financial press.

p 163/153 Looking at stocks on the Wall Street Journal's leading
percentage- decline and new-low lists, for example, occasionally turns
up an out-of-favor investment idea. Similarly, when a company
eliminates its dividend, its shares often fall to unduly depressed
levels.

p 166/156 Some investors insist on trying to obtain perfect knowledge
about their impending investments, researching companies until they
think they know everything there is to know about them. This diligence
is admirable, but it has two shortcomings. First, no matter how much
research is performed, some information always remains elusive;
investors have to learn to live with less than complete
information. Second, even if an investor could know all the facts
about an investment, he or she would not necessarily profit.

But information generally follows the well-known 80/20 rule: the first
80 percent of the available information is gathered in the first 20
percent of the time spent. The value of in-depth fundamental analysis
is subject to diminishing marginal returns.

p 167/157 David Dreman recounts "the story of an analyst so
knowledgeable about Clorox that 'he could recite bleach shares by
brand in every small town in the Southwest and tell you the production
levels of Clorox's line number 2, plant number 3.  But somehow, when
the company began to develop massive problems, he missed the
signs....' The stock fell from a high of 53 to 11."

Most investors strive fruitlessly for certainty and precision,
avoiding situations in which information is difficult to obtain.  Yet
high uncertainty is frequently accompanied by low prices.  By the time
the uncertainty is resolved, prices are likely to have
risen. Investors frequently benefit from making investment decisions
with less than perfect knowledge and are well rewarded for bearing the
risk of uncertainty.

p 168/158 Insider Buying and Management Stock Options Can Signal
Opportunity
