The Only Three Questions That Count - Investing by Knowing What Others Don't
Ken Fisher

p 32 That budget deficits are good for stocks isn't a lucky
fluke. Economically, it makes sense if you can get yourself to think
about debt and deficits correctly. (We cover this in chapter 6). For
now, suppose budget deficits really are good for stocks in America and
surpluses really are bad. If that is true, we ought to be able to see
it happening close to the same way in other developed Western
nations. That trick is a really nifty one most folks never use. And we
do see it overseas.

p 37 Question Two: What can I see that other's can't? The more you
ask, the more you see.

p 40 - 42 44

p 48 Essentially, you seek one of two things when asking Question
Two. First, you want a pattern - some sort of correlation - between
two or more variables people generally think are wholly
unrelated. Second, you're looking for a pattern many people see but
disregard, deride, or misinterpret.

p 52 A bear market is a prolonged stock market downturn exceeding 20%
(The difference between a bear market and a correction is magnitude
and duration - a correction being much shorter lived, only months, and
a dro smaller than 20 percent). By contrast, a recession is generally
defined as two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth, but it's
tough to know if you're in a recession while it#s happening since GDP
numbers get heavily restated afterwards.

p 86 Bull markets die with a wimper, not with a bang. There isn't a
dramatic spike top to bull markets if the historic measure is
calculated correctly. In stead, they roll over slowly for many months,
just like the market did in 2000. For more than 10 months around the
top, the MSCI World Index never got outside of an 8.5 percent
bandwidth, slowly churning sideways, innocently dropping a few
percentage points here and rallying there. At such time, TGH (The
Great Humiliator) has professionals screaming "Buy the dips! It's not
too late! This bull has legs!"

Bear market bottoms are different only in form. TGH just confuses us
differently. Bottoms are often violent and sharp, freaking everyone
out so enough fools finally dump their stocks. Just when folks who
first got into stocks at the peak abandom them in fatigue, stocks take
off sharply, leaving the messes and the masses in the dust. "It's just
a bear market correction" pundits murmur. "Don't be fooled" the rasp,
cough and add, "Stocks are done for a long, long time". And then
global stocks soar 33 percent like they did in 2003.

p 108 You must shun pride and accumulate regret. It's the simplest,
most basic trick I know to becoming a better investor. If you have a
stock up a lot, assume you aren't a genius. Assume you're lucky, and
luck can run out. If you have a stock down a lot, don't run from the
regret. Accumulate regret with every loss. Live with it. Love
it. ... Assume you and only you were wrong about every down stock and
your job is to learn a lesson about why you were wrong that teaches
you how to do the same thing correctly next time. If you can embrace
your regret, you will be less inclined to sell at relative low
points. Remember, the idea is not to buy low and sell whenever stock
prices have you freaking out.

Studies show less overconfident investors do better than more
overconident ones and you make yourself less overconfident over time
by accumulating regret and shunning pride.

This is a game in which if you're right 70 percent of the time, in the
long-run you're a super monster success.

p 121 list of websites for historical digging

p 223  The Wizard of Oz and an Oz of Gold

Did you know when L. Frank Baum put pen to paper to write The
Wonderful Wizard of Oz (published in 1900 and later immortalised in
the film starring among others, Judy Garland, Ray Bolger, and Bert
Lahr), he didn't intend to write a magical children's story? No. He
meant it as sharp satirical satire and monetoary allegory, involving
the economic debates and plotical players of the 1890s.

Don't scour the movie for hidden meaning. The 1939 film was indeed
intended as light-hearted fare during dark times. Instead, go back to
the original text, where no one in 1900 could miss the meaning behind
Dorothy's /silver/ shoes. (Red looked better in Technicolor). It
should grab you instantly that "Oz" is an ounce of gold.

p 293 While bull market durations vary considerably, most bear markets
last about a year to 18 months on the outside. Very few in modern
history last fully two years or longer.

Bear markets rarely last as long as your brain wants to think they do
once you've gotten out successfully. You hear plenty of rhetoric about
"cycilical bulls within long-term secular bears" which is supposed to
mean positive years are blips in a overall downward super-cycle. What
nonsesnse! These are all people who have been TGH-ed.

p 296 Here's another reason you needn't time the start of a bear
perfectly. Every US and global bear market we've looked at, except
one, had an average monthly decline, top to bottom, ranging between
1.25 percent and 3 percent, but 2 percent is a fair enough average -
1973 to 1974 is a good example again (see figure 8.5). The exception
proving the rule was 1987, which was so short lived in duration, by
the time you bailed out the market had recovered and you were left
looking and feeling pretty foolish.

If you suspect you're experiencing a bear, be patient and watch. If
you see a market decline exceeding the 2 percent average, wait for it
to bounce back before getting out. You may simply be experiencing a
correction. But, with a typical bear market, you'll soon see a
short-lived pullback to higher prices within that 2 percent per month
range off the top and have a better chance to get out. Patience is a
virtue here.

Joe Goodman was a wise man ... He advised readers in the 1940s and
1950s to never call a break too soon. He advocated waiting three
months after you suspect a peak has happened before calling a bear a
bear (as I showed in the previous illustration). The notion that bull
markets die with a whimper, not a bang, the thw-thirds one-third rule,
the 2 percent rule, and Goodman's three-month rule keep you from
pulling the ripcord too soon on a correction and then watching a bull
market soaring still higher.

p 317 Before yo begin thinking about a strategy, let's establish a few
ground rules about what you can hope to achieve. Ask anyone what their
investing goals are and you'll find a plethora of confounding
answers. Think of your own goals. Can you describe them in four words
or less? If it takes 10 pages with accompanying visuals, you've been
swayed by a financial salesperson who wants you to believe you have
unique goals unlike those of millions of others - ones requiring a
stunning array of fancy financial products.

