THE BIG SECRET FOR THE SMALL INVESTOR
by Joel Greenblatt
Sep 2012

p 20: the secret to successful investing is to figure out the value of something - and then pay a lot less

Chapter 3 mentions valuation measures:
* relative value
* acquisition value
* liquidation value - p 38: in practice, few managers of even money-losing companies voluntarily choose eliminate their own jobs
* sum-of-parts valuation

p 40 A company's money and resources usually run out well before management runs out of a new turnaround plan

Chapter 4 Greenblatt relates how he passed an exam on Shakespeare despite knowing nothing. Everyone found the task impossible. p 44 always remember that everyone else has to deal with the same issues. Under the right circumstances, your guesses will likely be just as good, and sometimes even better, than those of many "experts".

p 49 If you don't have a good idea what's going to happen in the industry, with the company's new product or services, or the effects of new technology on the company, then you can't really make good estimates for future earnings or growth rates. If you can't do that, you have no business investing in that company in the first place!

p 53 Greenblatt suggest a hurdle rate of the 10-year US Treasury bond - at the time of writing, it was 6%, which he uses as a proxy for the risk-free rate. He suggests using a hurdle of 6%, regardless of how low government rates go.

p 55 What strategy would yo use to beat Tiger Woods? Just don't play him at golf!

p 56 To put the odds in your favour, you have to change the game. As it turns out, when it comes to the stock market, there are a number of ways to do just that. One of the best is to fly a little below the radar, to buy shares in smaller companies where the big boys simply can't play.

p 57 It's generally not worth it for institutions with hunders of millions or billions to invest to bother with individual companies with market capitalizations below $500 million or even $1 billion.



p 61 Greenblatt recommends sticking to a few sectors that you know something about. However, if you can't even do that ...

p 62 They also aren't trying to figure out whether eigtheenth-century French furniture is about to skyrocket in vlaue. That would require them to predict the future, too. Instead, they try to make their challenge much easier. Whether they find a beautiful antique desk or a pretty impressionist painting, they really ask only one question before buying: are there comparable pieces of furniture or paintings that have recently sold at auction (or to dealers) at prices far above the potential purchase price? That's it! ... Their real edge comes from taking this knowledge and applying it in places off the beaten path. Whilse these places are a bit tougher to find, less competition from other informed collectors creates the opportunity to find undiscovered bargains.

p 63 As it happens, the stock market has its own version of country auctions and estate sales. This area of the investment world is often refereed to as "special situations". Knowing where to look, rather than extraordinary talent, is the most important part of finding bargains in some of these less well-followed areas.

p 65 Another great source for bargains includes the unlikely niche of stocks coming out of bankruptcy. [In a debt for equity swap, the recipients of the new shares may decide to just dump the shares on the market, which creates a greater chance for mispriced bargains]. Other special situation areas with the potential to create even more bargain opportunites include restructurings, mergers, liquidations, asset sales, distributions, rights offerings, recapitalizations, options, smaller foreign securities, and many more.

p 82 Looking at just the top quartile (best-performing 25 percent) of managers over a recent decade [Davis Advisors 1/1/00-12/31/09], almost all of these top-performing managers (96 percent) spent at least one three-year period during that decade in the bottom half of the performance rankings. Even more telling, 70 percent spent at least three years in the bottom quartile (bottom 25 percent of managers) and a staggering 47 percent spent at least three years in the bottom 10 percent. In other words, even the best-performing managers go through long periods of significant underperformance.

Chapter 7 Most indices are market-weighted.

p 94 With regard to the S&P 500 Index, while the largest twenty companies out of the five hundred represent only 4 percent of the companies on the list, these twenty companies represent approximately one-third of the market value of the entire index. The largest company of the S&P 500 represents approximately 3.5 percent of the index..

p 95 Only about 30 percent of active managers beat the Russell 1000 or S&P 500 indexes over time.

p 98 In fact, the effect of owning too much of the overpriced stocks and too litytle of the bargain-priced stocks is actually built into the market-cap-weighting system. 

p 102 Over the last two decades, at least theoreticallym and S&P 500 equally weighted index would have indeed outperformed the capitalisation-weighted index by an average of 1.5 percent to 2 percent per year before factoring in expenses.

An equally weighted portfolio, to stay that way, must be constantly rebalanced..

p 103 There are also a number of what are known as "fundamentally weighted index strategies" that have some definite advantages over simply equally weighting all stocks. The size of a company can be measured by the amount of sales the company has, by earnings, bu a company's book value (essentially its assets minus its liabilities), by dividends, or by any number or combination of other measures of economic size. 

p 105 Basing weights on fundamental size won't make us extra money; it just won't systematically overweight the overpriced stocks and underweight the underpriced stocks like a market-cap-weighted index will. [fundamental-weighting helps us overcome liquidity problem that equal-weighting might have]

p 107 In addition, since the fundamental characteristics of a company (such as sales, earnings, and book value) don't jump around like stock prices do, fundamental weightings don't change all that drastically often.

Chapter 8

Calculate earnings yield (reciprocal of PER).

p 118 For what we'll call out /value-weighted index/, the cheaper a company appears, the more we'll own of it.

p 119 Buffett suggest that while buying a business at a bargain price is great, buying a /good/ business at a bargain price is even better. 

So before we create our own value-weighted index, we should probably figure out a way to take advantage of this important insight. While there are clearly man ways to define what makes a business  /good/, the measure we're going to use is easy to calculate.

p 120 Essentially, abusiness needs two things in order to operate: working captial and fixed assets. 

Our goal is simply to measure how well a company can turn investments in working capital and fixed assets into earnings. 

p 121 What would happen if we constructed an index that weighted stocks not based on size but based on a combination of how "cheap" and "good" they were?

p 122 Table shows a value-weighted index return of 13.9% over the period 1990 to 2000/06, comapred with Russell 1000 of 7.9%, and S&P 500 of 7.6% - that's an annual outperformance of 6.2%

p 125 the value-weighted index uses measures of "cheapness" (trailing earnings yield) and "quality" (trailing return on capital)

p 126 the average actively managed equity mutual fund portfolio turns over aproximately 100 percent or more each year



