SCREW WORK - LET'S PLAY

p 50

Creator - big-picture thinking, starting projects and businesses, coming up with new ideas, brainstorming, inventing, innovating. Creators get wealthy from creating products and businesses that others manage and deliver.

Star - standing out from the crowds; being in the limelight; presenting, performing.

Supporter - interpersonnal skills and building relationships

Deal maker - communication, influence and negotiation

Trader - buying low and selling high'  Traders have been trading all their life - haggling for a discount or experimenting with a market stall.

Accumulator - detail-oriented, following systems and procedures, being reliable, meticulous and delivering on time; playing it safe, spotting what might go wrong with a project. Create wealth by playing the long game; accumulating shares, property, assets. Or helping keep a team grounded, ensuring that everything is in order and that what needs to get done gets done on time. Weaknesses: may procrastinate, gets distracted by detail; can be more pessimistic than optimistic; low to act.

Lord Strengths: organised, detailed; analyses every situation; loves research; sees distinctions others miss; able to list out every detail. The Lord's wealth comes from flow - cashflow from leasing assets. Lords love an automated business that never requires them to turn up. Weaknesses: little patience with social niceties; often involved in excessive organising; can get absorbed in the data; often misses the big picture. Lords act slowly and certainly, which can frustrate those around them.

Mechanic Strengths: finding a bettwer way to do something; taking ad hoc ideas and processes (often from Creators) and turning them into repeatable systems or products; able to fine-tune, simplify, replicate and improve; perfectionist and detail-oriented. Waknesses: communication sytel can cause friction; can seem aloof and removed; often very structured and inflexible; focus on perfection can lead to slow willingness to change; may get caugh in detail.

The ones that resonate with me are creators, accumulators, and especially lords.

What feels out of flow: designing pretty interfaces, boring repetitive work.

