++ You Call The Shots

By Cameron Johnson

p4:

 ... my dad used to say: "If you love what you do, you'll never have to work a day in your life"

Some people never get around to starting their own business out of the fear that it's too difficult, or that the risks are too high and the chances of success are to daunting. Don't believe it. Starting your own business is hard work, but it's not rocket science. I started my first company with no real business training and almost no money, and although I had entrepreneurial parents, they never funded any of my businesses or helped me run them. The truth is, building a successful business is more about common sense and the right attitude than it is about any kind of special training or inherent talents.

And the risks? Part of being an entrepreneur is learning how to take only those risks you can afford. You don't have to take out loans or go into serious debt to build a successful business. I've never taken a single business loan - from a bank or from my parents.

p9 I have always believed in going after the things you want in life. So many people tend to hesitate, to overthink, or second-guess. Not entrepreneurs. One of the keys to being a successful entrepreneur is being willing to put yourself out there, to throw yourself headlong into the pursuit of your dreams.

p15 I was fortunate to learn very early on the key pronciple that all successful entrepreneurs need to know: First, you have to believe in yourself. It's actually not that difficult to success. It's much more commonsense than rocket science. But it starts with finding the courage to put yourself out there. Believing in yourself is what gives you the confidence and resilience to deal with rejections and doubts.

First and foremost, you must be able to sell yourself. People don't buy your product or service only because they like it or want it; they also buy it because they like you. If they don't like you, then in many cases it doesn't matter how much they like the product you're selling, they won't buy it.

p21 http://www.cameronjohnson.com

p31 People often ask me why I've been so consistently successful in business, and the single biggest reason I can give them is this: I was fortunate enough to learn about money from my parents at an early age. I've never carried any debt; I pay off my cards every month. I've never spent more than I had - not personally, and not in any of my businesses.

p37 The most important thing I've learned about money is not to chase it. If you chase money, it will ruin your life. If instead you put your energies into pursuing skills, knowledge and understanding, the money will follow you.

p39 But the truth is, great ideas for successful new businesses don't need a miraculous moment of inspiration. Good business ideas are all around us - and they start coming to you a whole lot more naturally if you just keep your brain working on them and your mind open to them.

People often ask me, "Where do you get your ideas?" There's no single answer, because they can come from anywahere. Sometimes an idea would hit me while I was shooting baskets or just talking with my friends. I have never sat down at a desk and applied any sort of fixed process or "method". But I'm always thinking about it, mulling ideas over in the back of my mind.

Sometimes I keep a Word document on my computer with a running list of random business ideas - or even just seeds of an idea - that I've had but haven't yet pursued.

How do yu judge whether an idea is a good one? To some extent it's like the question "How do you know who will become your best friends?" There's a chemistry to it, an intuitive sense that goes beyond calculation. It clicks or it doesn't.

It helps to apply Warren Buffett's investment advice here: start with what you know. You don't need to stray far from your own home to find great ideas.

It's not just that this approach is easier; there are also major benefits to starting with what you know. For one thing, it will be something that has value to you, and ideally you should be the perfect customer for your service or product. What's more, starting with what you know means that you'll have a solid grasp of what your customers really want and how much they'll be willing to pay for it. Starting with what you know means you've already done a ton of market research.

One of the best ways to come up with a strong idea is to start with a problem - especially one you've experienced yourself - and see if you can spin it. Ask yourself "How could I change this problem? How could I solve it?" 

p 42

You can figure that a company will typically sell for about five times its annual earnings, plus the market value of watever assets it has.

p 47

Think about you own life: Is there some service or product that you don't have now but if you did, would help you save money, save time, or make your life easier and this more prodcutive? If it's something you could use, there are probably others who could use it, too.

Think about small businesses in your area: Waht do they need? What if you created a Web-based community for your town where all these small businesses would pay to advertise? A lot of communities have sites like this - and even more do no. You could promote your Web site with billboards, flyers, and word of mouth.

p 48

In fact, here's what I suggest: befor reading any further, take a pad of paper and for the next ten or fifteen minuts jot down any and all everyday customer needs you can think of - things small businesses need, things your family and friends need, things you need yourself. Don't think to much about it; just let it flow, have fun with it.

p 120 When you see revenue slowing, you need to do one of two things: find ways to generate additional revenu, or immediately cut your expenses. What companies often do, instead, is try to "grow their way" out of the crunch. But you can't grow your way out if your basic model is flawed; the only thing you'll "grow" is your losses. ... We weighed those options and didn't like any of them. The only rational choice was to close the company.

p 148 The most valuable education, the kind I believe is absolutely essential to success in business, can come from only one place: your own experience. More than any type of knowledge, I attribute my success to the education that came about from these three factors:
1. I am willing to work hard
2. I follow through on my ideas
3. I am willing to fail

No page: As at 17-Nov-2010, Cameron Johnson works at Magic City Ford as a sales manager in Roanoke http://www.magiccityford.com/meet-our-staff.aspx

p 195 Although I had Ford in mind when I put together these thoughts, you can apply them just as well to any company, no matter what its size:
1. Never relt on advertising. Good marketing makes people want to buy your product. Bad marketing actually hurts sales. If something works, do more of it - and if something isn't working, don't keep doing it.
2. p196 Invest in effective incentives. Instead of puring money into expensive (and ineffective) advertising, Ford would do far better putting that money in the hand of the people who really count: their customers and salespeople. For example, they could offer owner-loyalty incentives that would bring customers back.
3. p197 Take care of your customers. It's usually cheaper to keep an existing customer than it is to acquire a new one. The most powerful form of advertising, and the one form that will never lose it effectiveness or become obsolete, is word of mouth. There's no better customer-relations policy than this: underpromise and overdeliver.
4. p199 Creat a culture of follow-up. p 2010 Taking good care of yur customers - not just when they're in your shop and thinking about buying, but the day after they buy, and the week after than, and the year after that - is the most important thing you can do to make your business flourish.

p 214 Ghandhi beautifully articulated this idea of balance, and how dangerous is is when we don't achieve that sense, in something he called the "Eight Blunders of the World": wealth without workl pleasure without conscience, knowledge without character, commerce without morality; science without humaity; worship without sacrifice; politics without principles; and rights without responsibilities.

p 221 I loved the line from Trump when he was going through a point when he was $900m in debt: "I remember looking at a homeless man and thinking, 'That man is worth $900m nore than I am!'"